



                           AGGRAVATING LADIES


                                 BEING
            A LIST OF WORKS PUBLISHED UNDER THE PSEUDONYM OF
                 “A LADY,” WITH PRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS
                     ON THE ART OF DESCRIBING BOOKS
                           BIBLIOGRAPHICALLY.


                                   BY


                              OLPHAR HAMST


  “The time is coming when really learned men will again be ashamed of
  not seeing the value of all the uses of mind: when nothing but
  thoughtlessness or impudence, mercurial brain or brazen forehead,
  will aver that no knowledge is practical, except that which ends in
  the use of material instruments.”—Prof. De Morgan (Arithmetical
  Books 1847, p. 54).


                                 LONDON
                     BERNARD QUARITCH 15 PICCADILLY
                                 1880.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.

                                -------


                                                           PAGE.

        Preface                                                5

        Preliminary Remarks                                    7

        How to describe a Book                                 9

        Cataloguing                                           10

        Of different descriptions of books                    14

        Matters to be attended to in Cataloguing              21

        Style of Printing                                     27

        Punctuation                                           29

        The beginning and the end                             30

        Of errors                                             32

        On the means of identifying the authors of            35
        anonymous and pseudonymous publications

        List of Works by a Lady                               40

        Advertisements                                        52

        Index                                                 54

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.

                                -------


In the course of collecting materials for my “Handbook of Fictitious
Names of Authors of the Nineteenth Century,” I came across the titles of
a number of works purporting to be written by “A Lady,” the authorship
of which appeared to be unknown.

It occurred to me that I might probably ascertain the names of many of
the authors, and also proper descriptions of such of the books as I had
not seen, and was unable to see, if I printed a list of them. As
however, the essential points to be attended to, in the proper
description of a book, are little understood, I thought it would be
desirable to prefix to the list a few suggestions on the way to supply
correct information. These gradually developed, so that I soon found the
subject required more space, more time, and more consideration than I at
first imagined.

In the hope that I might obtain assistance from others, and with a view
to getting hints and exciting discussion, I wrote an article for “Notes
and Queries,” which was printed in the numbers for January and April of
1872, entitled, “How to describe a Book.” I now go more fully into the
matters that I consider require attention in the proper description of a
book.

An explanation of the title of this essay will no doubt be looked for in
the preface. It is very simple. In my searches for the Authors’ names,
the ladies in this list have resisted all enquiry in the most
aggravating manner. Therefore I took the title of Aggravating Ladies as
being concise and appropriate.

The information asked for relates only to English Literature of the 19th
century, to which period I confine myself entirely. The anonymous and
pseudonymous writers during this century being more than sufficient to
occupy a whole life of laborious application.

I have not included in the list any phrases such as:—A Lady of Rank—A
Lady of Distinction—A Lady of Hebrew faith—A Banished Lady—A Young
Lady—A too generous Young Lady—nor, A Lady of distinction, who has
witnessed and attentively studied what is esteemed truly graceful and
elegant amongst the most refined nations of Europe (!) The pseudonym of
the author of The Mirror of the Graces, or an English lady’s costume
[treating of] ... taste ... grace; modesty ... dress ...; rank ... in
life; ... of accomplishments; ... the mind ... means of preserving
beauty ...; by a lady, &c. London, Crosby & Co., 1811.

On the other hand I have inserted some titles which have been entered in
different catalogues as by “a lady,” when those words do not occur on
the title. Such works probably being really written by a lady, the
publisher naturally desired they should go forth with that impress of
good faith and with all the prestige attaching to that talismanic little
word.

As I have already explained, my list comprises only works published in
the present century, whose authors are unknown to me. I have a longer
list of works by “a lady,” whose names are known, and who have therefore
ceased to be aggravating. I do not give the title when I know the name
of the author because I am now seeking not supplying information.

Another list as long as that I give at the end I have not printed, not
having been able to see the books themselves so as to describe them from
actual inspection.

I shall be grateful for information as to any of the works, or the lives
of these Aggravating Ladies.


      38, Doughty Street, W.C.

            July, 1880.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

                                -------

        What’s in a name?

        Ask the booksellers, and they will tell you, _much_ in
          the title-page of a new book....

        The making up of a taking title-page, seems to have been
          the peculiar province of the bookseller, time out of
          mind.—_Fly leaves.... London_ [published and edited
          by] _John Miller_, 1854.


After a perusal of my list I think every gentleman will agree with me
that Ladies really are very aggravating. It would be curious to hear the
exclamation of any lady who has written as “A lady,” upon looking it
over. She would probably exclaim that when she wrote as “A lady,” she
thought she was the only one, or at all events one of the first.

The authoress of: “How to dress on £15 a year as a lady, by a lady,”
would no doubt be surprised to find such a long list for the present
century alone. I mention this flowing and somewhat vigorously written
little work; but it is of too recent a date for me to make any enquiry
for the author’s name, especially as it is a secret that, from the
present popularity of the book, is not likely to be long kept.[1] For I
have remarked that though these ladies do not like placing their names
on their books, yet there is little desire to disguise the authorship,
and enquiries are generally soon satisfied if a work has attained any
success. They like to see themselves in print, so long as there is no
infringement of the patent of modesty.

Footnote 1:

  Since this was written (1875) the author’s name has been divulged, and
  there has also been a Chancery Suit in relation to the work. I have
  put the book in the list which follows as an illustration of some of
  my remarks.

The inference from this is that my list is composed chiefly of works
that have not become famous or popular, which is the fact. If secresy
were their object, it has to the present time been attained, for they
have defied my researches. Nevertheless I believe that to some one of
the author’s friends or relations she has been known, but “no man is a
prophet in his own country,” and friends and relations very often care
too little for what literary ladies are doing to follow Captain Cuttle’s
advice and “make a note” of an author’s name. Knowledge is often the
greatest enemy to the recording of facts. People often know so well whom
a book is by, that they are not even aware of its pseudonimity. The
majority of novel readers never know the name of the author, nor do they
care to enquire, and much prefer reading a novel “By the author of” some
previous work which has interested them.

In many cases I am asking for information which the authoresses do not
conceal, and which is well known though unknown to me.

Thus I ascribe my not knowing the name of the author rather to the fact
of there being no one to make a note of it when found, than any desire
on the fair writer’s part to remain unknown. When a lady has written her
first work as “a lady” she seldom adopts that denomination in her second
work; but more frequently uses the term “By the author of” the previous
work, or “By a lady, author of,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        HOW TO DESCRIBE A BOOK.

                                -------

        “If you are troubled with a pride of accuracy, and
          would have it completely taken out of you, print a
          catalogue.” (Author unknown).

        Dr. Aikin used to say, that nothing is such an obstacle
          to the production of excellence as the power of
          producing what is pretty good with ease and rapidity.
          _The Circulator_ [1825] quoted in the Manual of
          Laconics by John Taylor, 1838, p. 361.


Practice is the best, if not the only way to learn how to describe a
book. Simply reading descriptions of what to do is of little use. Indeed
practice is found to teach so much, that we often find authors of
bibliographical books cancelling the early portions of their works in
order to correct those defects and deficiencies which experience has
brought forcibly to their notice. Such was the case with the first part
of Quérard’s France Littéraire, which was called in and cancelled; and
the Bibliotheca Cornubiensis of Boase and Courtney, published by
Longmans in 1874.

Every one must be guided by their particular requirements; but must
never lose sight of the absolute necessity there is of following a
system rigidly, and of being accurate.

With these preliminary remarks I will now proceed to give some hints
derived from my own experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CATALOGUING.

                                -------

        “The sheet-anchor of cataloguing-work, as of all other
          true work that a man has to do, is accuracy.”—_Edward
          Edwards_ (Memoirs of Libraries, 1859, vol. II. 868).

        ... “l’exactitude est le meilleur fondment du succès
          des livres de bibliographie.”—Quérard, Omissions et
          bévues du livre intitulé La Littérature Française
          contemporaine ... 1848, p. xv.

        “As bibliographers, we cannot indeed but wish, that the
          catalogue of every library were a bibliographical
          dictionary of its books.... There is no species of
          literary labor so arduous, or which makes so extensive
          demands upon the learning of the author, as that of
          the preparation of such works.”—Smithsonian Report on
          the construction of catalogues.... By C. C. Jewett....
          1853, p. 10.

        “It is impossible to labor successfully, without a rigid
          adherence to rules. Although such rules be not
          formally enunciated, they must exist in the mind of
          the cataloguer and guide him, or the result of his
          labors will be mortifying and unprofitable.”—Ibid, p.
          17.


I have used the word Bibliography, but I must warn the student that it
is meaningless, or, rather, its meanings are so numerous and varied,
being used for every sort of thing connected with books, that for any
scientific purpose the word is useless. Bibliotheca also is used amongst
other things to express a miscellaneous collection of titles; whether
good, bad, or indifferent, matters little.

What is wanted is a short word which shall express that a book is
accurately described. The word catalogue is worse for its indefinite
meaning than bibliotheca or bibliography. The science or art of
describing books has no technical term.[2]

Footnote 2:

  The reader can refer to Notes and Queries, 4 Series IX, p. 8, for some
  remarks on the inconvenient length of bibliographical words.

In describing books, accuracy is the one thing to attain. And the object
should be so to describe the book, that anybody else shall be certain
from the description that a particular book they have in hand is the one
described.

So difficult did Prof. De Morgan consider this, with regard to early
printed books that he said if he had to do his work on “Arithmetical
Books” over again he would invariably describe some defect or error in
the printing.

I now propose to give some hints on this subject, premising that there
is at present no “Grammar” of Bibliography—nothing settled, no
recognized authority.

Supposing a person were about to make a catalogue of a library, or even
of a few books, the first thing to do is to lay down certain rules, to
be strictly adhered to, or adopt rules laid down by another for that
purpose. This has been done for many years past by the librarians of our
National Library. So that there at least we have a Catalogue that we can
depend upon so far as it goes: how far that is the rules inform us.
Several of them simply provide against the prevailing loose notions of
cataloguing. Rules for example to tell us that titles are written
straight on as they are found, or in the language in which the book is
written and not in another, read like satires on ignorance. And yet how
necessary they are.

These rules, invaluable as a guide to every catalogue maker, will be
found printed in the: Catalogue of printed books in the British Museum,
volume 1. London, printed by order of the trustees, MDCCCXLI, in folio;
the Preface is signed by the editor Sir Antonio Panizzi, and examples of
the rules will be found in: A handbook for Readers at the British
Museum, by Thomas Nichols, assistant in the British Museum, London,
Longman, 1866, p. 51. This useful little work unfortunately has no
index. A catalogue drawn up according to the rules of the Museum will be
found in: “A list of the books of reference in the Reading room of the
British Museum.”

The rules are ninety-one in number but for small libraries where
provision is not required for every language under the sun, a smaller
number would be sufficient.[3]

Footnote 3:

  Since the above was written a most exhaustive and useful work
  rendering a reference to any other almost superfluous has been
  published, entitled “Rules for a printed dictionary catalogue by
  Charles A. Cutter,” forming part II of the Special Report on public
  libraries in the United States, Washington, 1876.

Whatever rules are determined upon should be printed in the catalogue,
so that those who consult it may know at once whether or not they are
likely to find what they want and how.

                                -------

The first question that arises is the amount of title page information
to be given. To abbreviate or not abbreviate becomes the difficult
question. It generally resolves itself into one of expense, and
abbreviated titles are determined upon.

I now therefore treat of the matter as it is, and not as it should be,
for if I treated it as it should be, namely with full titles, I should
have little to say.

He must have been a bold man who first began to abbreviate titles for a
catalogue. It is a most unsatisfactory practice, though now having long
precedent for its use. It is like cutting off a leg or an arm, the body
can still go on, it is true, but it is nevertheless mutilated.

The more title page information a bibliotheca gives the greater will be
its usefulness. Everything, however, is subordinate to the proper
description of the book. If that is done upon certain principles and
rules, the cataloguer will at least be consistent, which few of the
present day are.

Every word of a title may be given and yet be inaccurate, on the other
hand half the title may be left out and yet be accurate[4] though not
perfect as I shall presently show.

Footnote 4:

  Instead of “inaccurate” and “accurate,” I had written the words
  “unbibliographical” and “bibliographical,” but as I have already
  explained that word does not at present necessarily include accuracy,
  which word will better explain what I wish to impress on the student.

The ordinary and most popular way of referring to or describing a book
is to reverse everything and alter the title. For example, let us
suppose it is stated that in 1868 Messrs. Longman published an octavo
volume of 800 pages by George Brown, entitled a Treatise on the best
mode of ventilation. Here everything is topsy turvy, besides being
incorrectly called a treatise instead of an essay.[5] The proper title
being: An historical essay on ventilation, by George Brown, London,
Longman, 1868, octavo, pp. xv. 786.

Instances of this kind of thing the student will find at every turn, in
every publication, periodical or otherwise.

Footnote 5:

  Refer to the remarks of Bolton Corney “On the new general Biographical
  dictionary”, p. 33.

Another bad practice is cutting short the title page and explaining in a
note what the book is about almost in the words of the author, so that
all the necessary information is given, only incorrectly instead of
correctly, an example of which, taken from Lowndes, will be found in my
list.

The difficulty is not to find instances of looseness in describing
books, but to find instances where they are properly described. I know
of few bibliothecas, English or foreign, that can be relied on.

Probably these will appear to some trivial matters. Yet what thought and
anxious consideration do most authors give to the titles of their works,
before they finally suit their fancy; frequently, indeed, not being
satisfied with them as sent forth to the world. How has the author
considered whether he will put his own name, or whether he will write
under a fictitious name, or his initials, or simply call himself “A
Gentleman,” or designate himself by the office he holds as “A
Magistrate.” Then, with what difficulty has he at last settled upon a
publisher, and for what a number of reasons may he have done so. And yet
some ruthless barbarian, who is totally ignorant of all the trouble that
has been taken, and who knows nothing of the subject, cuts down our
author’s title without hesitation. Or perhaps, what is still more
astonishing, an author himself, although he has given the matter so much
thought, will sometimes on being asked, send a list of his works, in
which not a single title shall be correct, in which he will leave out
all the first words, erroneously state the subject as in the book
instead of as it appears on the title page: omit to say when published,
whether with his own name or not; and, finally, and almost invariably,
leave out the publisher’s name, which cost him so much pains to decide
on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  OF DIFFERENT DESCRIPTIONS OF BOOKS.

                                -------

        Catalogues must have nothing to do with distinctions
          between celebrity and obscurity. They must aim at
          serving the tyro no less than the professor.—_Edward
          Edwards_ (Memoirs of Libraries, 1859, II., p. 836).


Books may be classed under four heads, namely (1) Autonymous—(2)
Polyonymous—(3) Pseudonymous, and—(4) Anonymous.

1. Autonymous, the first and most common is with the author’s name
either on the title-page, or if not on the title-page, signed to a
preface, introduction, letter, or dedication, or in some part of the
book, or at the end. Speeches though usually anonymous with regard to
the reporting or editing, are frequently catalogued under the name of
the speaker as autonymous.

2. Polyonymous, is with several authors’ names. It is usual to enter
them under the name of the first author, with cross references from the
others.

3. Pseudonymous, without the author’s name, but with a fictitious name
or designation, thus giving some indication as to the author, though
possibly a very slight one. No matter in what part of the book the
pseudonym appears, the work is pseudonymous.[6]

In cataloguing, the pseudonym should no more be left out, than the
author’s name. If an author uses a pseudonym on the title, but gives his
real name in the book, it is not pseudonymous, but must be catalogued as
autonymous. In this case, as in all others, the pseudonym should be
given, even if the title is abbreviated. In fact the pseudonym for
bibliographical purposes takes the place of the author’s name. I have
not space here to enumerate the different classes of pseudonyms, of
which there are many varieties.[7]

Footnote 6:

  For a curious instance see the Handbook of Fictitious Names, p. 94.
  One who is BUT an attorney; and One who thinks for himself _i.e._ T.
  Truewit.

Footnote 7:

  A list, unfortunately containing many errors, will be found at the end
  of “A notice of the life and works of J. M. Quérard by Olphar Hamst:
  London, J. R. Smith, 1867.” This list is adopted by John Power in his
  “Handy-book about books,” with all my errors and a good stock of his
  own to boot. There is an extended treatise on pseudonyms in the
  introduction to either edition of Quérard’s “Supercheries Littéraires
  Devoilées.” The subject is also treated of in M. Octave Delepierre’s
  “Supercheries littéraires, pastiches,” Londres, Trübner, 1872.
  Probably the earliest treatise is that entitled “Auteurs déguisez,”
  Paris, 1690, by Adrien Baillet, but published without his name.

4. Lastly an Anonymous book is one without the author’s name, whether on
the title page, or any part of the book. The word anonymous has been and
still is very indiscriminately used to include pseudonymous. The
cataloguer must be careful not to be betrayed into this error so
fruitful of inaccuracy. This class of books has resisted the most
strenuous efforts of the learned to bring it within rules, every rule
for cataloguing such books requiring an exception. With anonymous works
having simple titles, such as “Aggravating Ladies” (supposing a work to
be published anonymously with such a title) the task is easy. Though
even this example will illustrate the difficulty of the subject, for
there are only two words and there are two ways of cataloguing, each
having advantages. By one system it would come under “Aggravating” and
by the other under “Ladies.” According to the system of Audiffredi[8]
and of Barbier[9] and of a similar work on English authors[10], it would
be catalogued by the first word, and for such works this is the most
approved method[11]. According to the Rules of the British Museum it
would be catalogued under Ladies.

Footnote 8:

  Audiffredi’s work, referred to in the Report on the British Museum
  (1850, p. 469), it is entitled “Bibliothecæ Casanatensis catalogus
  librorum typis impressorum,” tom 1-4, A-K. Roma, 1761-1788, fol., and
  is quoted by Barbier at p. xlviii of the work referred to in the next
  note.

Footnote 9:

  Dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes ... par A. A.
  Barbier ... Paris, 1806, 4 vols, 8o. It is curious to note that
  Barbier had not settled in his own mind at the date of the above the
  first edition, what was an anonymous work. He describes it as one upon
  the title page of which the author is not named, and he then states
  that sometimes the author’s name is found in the work; but he says it
  is the custom to class them all as anonymous and not to distinguish
  different degrees of anonymity. In the second edition in 1826 he very
  properly eliminated so far as he was able such works as contained the
  authors’ names. For many things the first edition is better than the
  second, in which many of the titles we are told were abbreviated. In
  the third and last and best edition, part of which was published in
  1872, his son, (see p. xxix., note) has so far as he was able,
  re-instated such titles because so many editors and others still
  continue to consider a work anonymous if the author’s name does not
  occur on the title page. This is a step backwards, and the sooner M.
  Olivier Barbier throws the editors and others overboard the better.

Footnote 10:

  A prospectus was issued in 1872, with the title: A dictionary of the
  anonymous and pseudonymous literature of Great Britain by the late
  Samuel Halkett.—See Notes and Queries 4 s. IX., p. 403.

Footnote 11:

  And is recommended in a pamphlet entitled: Hints on the formation of
  small libraries, by W. E. A. Axon, London, Trübner [1869] reprinted
  in: A handy book about books, by J. Power, Lond., J. Wilson, 1870, p.
  156, and he adopts it in: The literature of the Lancashire dialect, a
  bibliographical essay, by W. E. A. Axon, 1870.

It affords matter for consideration when we find it stated that “An
anonymous work is seldom read with confidence or quoted as an
authority.”[12]

Footnote 12:

  Bolton Corney, “On the new general Biographical dictionary,” 1839, p.
  15.

Many publications intended expressly for youth, and therefore requiring
some guarantee that they are fit for the purpose, are published without
the author’s name, though frequently with an indication of sex.

It may probably be that little as is the credit given to the anonymous
or pseudonymous work, for in the above quotation both are meant, it
would obtain less if it had the author’s real name[13].

Footnote 13:

  For examples see Notes and Queries 3rd s. XII, 394, and the Handbook
  of Fictitious Names.

To shew that a book was published without the author’s name, whether
anonymous or pseudonymous, some bibliographers have put an asterisk or
star at the beginning of the title. I am not aware that this, or indeed
any plan has systematically been adopted in any English work, except
within the last few years. In his learned Essay On the Literature of
Political economy, p. x, J. R. McCulloch says: “When the name of the
author of a work is included between brackets, it shows that it was
published anonymously.” He uses anonymous here in the sense of without
the author’s name, and to include pseudonymous. I made use of the star
in the Handbook of Fictitious Names in 1868, but only to indicate
anonymity, and not as Quérard uses it. In Notes and Queries for the 6th
April, 1872, I suggested the adoption of a line — to shew that a book
was published pseudonymously. And I made use of both signs in my
Bibliographical list of Lord Brougham’s publications. These signs have
the advantage of attracting the eye, and declaring at once the class of
book. On the other hand they cannot be used for foot notes, are likely
to be overlooked in printing, and there is always great difficulty in
getting readers to find out what signs mean. On the whole after much
consideration I have determined for the future to use simply
abbreviations of the words anonymous and pseudonymous which everybody
understands without explanation.

As in describing a book the principal object is to enable the student to
identify it, so that there may be no doubt that the cataloguer’s remarks
upon a certain book apply to that for which the reader is searching. It
is less important that autonymous works should be catalogued so fully as
anonymous, because the author’s name is at once a guide. For though two
autonymous works bear the same title their authors’ names would be
different. But not so with two anonymous works having the same title.

Pseudonymous works, in which the pseudonym is a name and not a phrase or
denomination, would come in the same category.

For anonymous, and frequently for pseudonymous works it is not only
desirable to give the full title, but to supplement it with any further
information that will help identification. As for example, if the book
is printed at a different place to that of sale or publication[14] or if
dated and addressed from what would appear to be the author’s residence,
or if there is any allusion in the work or the advertisements[15] to
other publications of the same author. Examples of all will be found in
my list. Though a book be anonymous so far as the title page informs us,
yet if pseudonymous from the preface or introduction being signed with a
fictitious name, or with initials or denomination, or other
qualification, it should be catalogued as pseudonymous. Thus following
the rule with regard to autonyms. Except when signed:—The Author, The
Editor, The Translator, Himself, or Herself, of which it is best to take
no notice, even if on the title. Such works should be considered
anonymous without even giving cross-references from those words.

Footnote 14:

  Many London publishers have printing houses out of town, in such cases
  the place of printing is no guide.

Footnote 15:

  Advertisements should generally be preserved. If, however, a book has
  been through a binder’s hands there is little chance of their
  surviving. Never send a book to the binder without special
  instructions to preserve the advertisements and covers or wrappers,
  and mark every page intended to be kept, otherwise there is a
  barbarous custom amongst binders, arising from ignorance or cupidity,
  of denuding every pamphlet of the covers and advertisements which
  frequently teem with matter useful in after years. Binders like to
  treat books like convicts, and shave their heads.

Of whatever description, whether autonymous, or anonymous, or
pseudonymous, the first words of the title, or the half title, should be
quoted correctly, and exactly as they occur, and to this rule there
should be no exception, whether for bibliographical lists, or for the
purpose of citation as an authority. For in the latter case, however
familiar the work cited may be, there are sure to be readers unfamiliar
with it, to whom a loose reference will cause trouble. The half title or
any abbreviation of the title, if used by the author of the book may be
adopted.

Few things cause greater waste of time amongst literary men than the
habitually careless manner in which they give references. Not only
should a book be correctly described, but the edition or date and page
ought to be added. Bibliographers (which term I here use to mean persons
who have concerned themselves with the description of books) have sinned
terribly in this respect by giving descriptions of books at second, or
even third-hand, and repeating the mistakes and blunders of the original
authority. Title pages are like rumours, the oftener they are repeated
the more incorrect they become. The student should never rely upon a
catalogue for the description of a book, unless the compiler has adhered
strictly to rules. A statement in bibliothecas, biographical
dictionaries, or catalogues, that a work is anonymous, can never be
relied upon[16].

Footnote 16:

  Those who desire to see examples of several classes of errors to be
  avoided can refer to the following works. On the new general
  Biographical dictionary: a specimen of amateur criticism in letters
  [signed Bolton Corney] to Mr. Sylvanus Urban [motto] London: Shoberl,
  1839, 8o. A remarkable piece of criticism indispensable to every
  biographer or bibliographer.

  Arithmetical books ... being brief notices of a large number of works
  drawn up from actual inspection by Augustus de Morgan ... London,
  1847. See the preface and introduction to this valuable and
  interesting work. The English catalogue of books, 1864, makes an
  edition of this work with the date 1853, at 2s 6d. Being desirous of
  possessing this, I wrote to the learned Professor to know where it was
  to be obtained, and what difference there was, he replied:—“The
  difference between the 1st and 2nd edition of my Arithmetical Books,
  is the difference between something and nothing, which, let Hegel say
  what he will, is a very great difference. There is not any second
  edition, nor I think, will be.” Refer also to an article by De Morgan
  in the Companion to the Almanac for 1853, entitled “On the difficulty
  of correct description of books,” pp. 5 to 19, full of various and
  useful matter.

  Handbook of Fictitious names of authors of the XIXth Century ... by
  Olphar Hamst ..., 1868, p. xi.

  Dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes par A. A. Barbier, 3e. ed., 1872,
  see the note by Olivier Barbier on the second page of the
  advertisement to the first volume.

After the first few words of the title every abbreviation or omission
should be indicated by three dots ... close together not thus. . . .
This is a better method than using an “etc.,” a sign which from the
carelessness of authors is frequently found on title-pages of books, and
if used by both authors and cataloguers we should never know which. As
few authors could explain the meaning of an “&c.” on the title, it is
not likely that readers can guess.

It has been customary to omit mottoes without any indication of the
omission, and this has been done in one of the most bibliographical
works published in England[17]. I only know of one work of importance
where special notice is taken of such omissions.[18]

Footnote 17:

  A descriptive catalogue of Friends’ books, ... by Joseph Smith, in two
  vols, ... 1867.

Footnote 18:

  This is the: Catalogue of the Manchester free library, reference
  department, prepared by A. Crestadoro, ... 1864, where the omission is
  indicated by three stars.

  In my “List of works on Swimming,” I give full titles, including
  mottoes of all the books I was able to see. In my “Bibliographical
  list of Lord Brougham’s publications,” I indicate the place of the
  motto on the title.

If a title page has a motto its omission should be shewn thus [motto].

To print mottoes when numerous or lengthy in an extensive work seems
quite out of the question. When short it is a luxury the bibliographer
may occasionally indulge in. I confess that this is one of the points I
have felt extremely puzzled about. I never abbreviate or omit anything
from a title-page without fear and trembling, which is intensified in
the case of mottoes. They frequently in one short verse, or sentence,
give the pith of a book, and my fear is that some one in the future
should wonder how I could be so stupid as to suggest their omission.

All additions should be indicated with the same care by placing them
between brackets [   ]. Additions in titles should be as few and as
short as possible, all explanatory matter can be given in a note.

Sometimes authors use brackets or parentheses on the title pages. When
this is the case, if of no use or unimportant, they should be left out
by the cataloguer. For instance, when an author has the words [Reprinted
from, &c.] in the title. To omit the brackets is the least misleading,
for if left in it would look as if this information were not supplied by
the author, and if (_sic_) were put it would not be understood as
referring to the brackets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




               MATTERS TO BE ATTENDED TO IN CATALOGUING.

                                -------

        In arranging a number of rules, it is difficult to
          please every reader. I have frequently been unable to
          satisfy myself; and therefore, cannot expect that the
          arrangement which I have at last adopted will give
          universal satisfaction.—W. LENNIE, The principles of
          English grammar ... 34th ed., Edinb., 1854, p. 4.

        Cataloguers may comment upon, but should never alter
          what it has been deemed right to state on the title
          page of a book by those who have framed it.—Art of
          making catalogues, &c. [by A. Crestadoro], 1856, p.
          14.


In cataloguing or describing a book six points at least should be kept
in view as necessary to its identification.[19]

(1.) Title.

(2.) Name of author, and sometimes description.

(3.) Place of publication.

(4.) Publisher’s name, and sometimes address.

(5.) The date of publication.

(6.) The size.

Footnote 19:

  The student may refer to the useful little pamphlet above quoted,
  entitled: The art of making catalogues of libraries, or a method to
  obtain in a short time, a most perfect, complete, and satisfactory
  printed catalogue of the British Museum library, by a reader therein
  [Dr. Crestadoro], Lond. 1856, p. 38.

If full titles (that is, an exact transcript of the title from beginning
to the end), are given, it will only be necessary for the cataloguer to
supply in its proper, or most suitable place, such of the above
information as is not on the title-page.

If abbreviations be adopted several considerations arise.

(1.) As to so much of the title as occurs before the author’s name we
have already said that the first few words should be copied word for
word, and afterwards every omission should be denoted by dots.

(2.) The name of the author should not be abbreviated, if it renders it
difficult to distinguish between two with the same initials. If the
author’s qualifications are omitted or abbreviated, dots ... of omission
should be inserted. A description after a name is often very important
and useful in determining the degree of credit to be attached to the
work, but they are frequently so numerous that they are too long for
most catalogues.

Works in more than one volume generally have the number on the title, as
“In three volumes, vol 1.” Take no notice of “Vol I.,” but invariably
state the number of volumes in the order in which it occurs on the
title-page. The number of volumes, however, is not always stated; in
some works each volume simply has “Vol I,” or “Vol II,” on the title,
when this is so, the number of volumes should be stated after the date
thus: “1873, in three volumes, octavo.” The reader would then know
whether the number of volumes was stated on the title or not.

There will be cases where this rule will not sufficiently indicate the
fact, as for instance, when the first does not, but the second does,
state the number of volumes. A note will meet this case, if necessary.

It may appear to some that so trifling a matter is unworthy of note, but
with this the cataloguer has nothing to do. His business is to note
facts however trivial, whether anybody should ever require them is not
in his province.

(3.) Place of publication. Several places of publication are frequently
given in the imprint of a book, when this is the case, the first place
should, at all events, be given, and if the book is not printed as well
as published there, the place where it is printed should be stated.

(4.) The Publisher’s name we seldom find in any list of books. I never
recollect to have seen it in any catalogue of a library, and in very few
bibliographical works. And yet it is often of great importance. In
cataloguing works without the author’s name it should seldom if ever be
omitted, however much the title is abbreviated. The publisher’s address
may often be added with advantage, especially in cases where he is
little known. For many firms who have been issuing works from the same
house for a century or even longer, it seems superfluous.[20]

Footnote 20:

  I must remind the student that I am only writing for present century
  books, I have no experience of cataloguing old books.

Both name and address of publishers may be abbreviated without marks of
omission, a rule having been made to that effect, so that the reader may
be apprised of the fact. Some small elementary works have as many as ten
or fifteen places and double that number of publishers in the imprint,
these of course would not be given in full unless with some special
object.

The publisher’s name when well known is also important as frequently
giving a character, or guarantee, if not of the literary worth of a
book, at all events of its sincerity.

If the publisher is also the author, but does not signify that fact, the
book must be considered anonymous. The publisher’s name (that is the
author’s) must be repeated, as would be the case if written by another
person.

Privately printed[21] works are frequently issued without the name of a
publisher or bookseller, though less frequently without that of a
printer, which if not on the title should be supplied in parenthesis or
in a note.

Footnote 21:

  For examples the student can refer to the only English work on the
  subject, of which two editions have been issued, viz., Martin’s
  Bibliographical catalogue of privately printed books. It is necessary
  to have both editions in consequence of the death of the author,
  unfortunately interrupting the completion of the second.

(5.) The date of publication, if not on the title, will like the
author’s name, be frequently found in some other part of the book. It
should then be supplied after the last word on the title in parenthesis.
If not in the book, it should be put between brackets [   ], and if
uncertain with a note of interrogation.

Stereotyped books are generally without dates of publication for certain
commercial reasons. Only superficial readers are duped by the artifice,
for the first object of the literary student would be to determine
approximately the date of issue. When the preface is not dated it is no
doubt as often through thoughtlessness as intention.

In quoting a work that has passed through numerous editions, it is often
useful to give the date of the first.

There is a practice amongst publishers of post dating books issued
towards the end of a year.[22] This practice will account for the dates
of books in some bibliothecas, biographies and catalogues, sometimes
being a year earlier than the date on the book. The title having been
copied from an advertisement or a review of the work apparently before
publication. When known to the cataloguer the actual year of issue
should be supplied in brackets immediately after the date of the title.

Footnote 22:

  See the article referred to (p. 19) by Prof. De Morgan, in the
  Companion to the Almanac.

(6.) With the different descriptions of sizes of books Professor De
Morgan was so exasperated that after giving descriptions of how the
sheets of a book are folded he says, “The words _folio_, _quarto_,
_octavo_, _duodecimo_, _decimo-octavo_, refer (in his book) entirely to
size, as completely as in a modern sale catalogue, the maker of which
never looks at the inside of a book to tell its form. All the very
modern distinctions of _imperial_, _royal_, _crown_, _atlas_, _demy_,
&c., &c., &c., I have relinquished to paper-makers and publishers, who
alone are able to understand them.”[23]

Footnote 23:

  Arithmetical Books, p. xii.

All the words in use to describe sizes are useless. They convey no
definite idea to the reader, for the simple reason that nothing definite
as to size is meant. The only definite meaning is that the paper is
folded into certain divisions, and not that the paper or print is of a
particular size. A quarto is often the size of an octavo, and an octavo
the size of a quarto, duodecimo, or anything else. Nevertheless though
not certain, the terms do in most cases, enable us to guess at the
probable or approximate size. The only way to be certain of the size is
to state it in inches.[24] Probably few literary men would put up with
the trouble of measuring.

Footnote 24:

  This plan is advocated in a work I cannot too strongly recommend. It
  is indispensable to every librarian. The learned author thoroughly
  studied all the various systems in vogue, and founds almost a code for
  the cataloguer upon them. It is the:—Smithsonian Report on the
  construction of catalogues of libraries and their publication by means
  of separate stereotyped titles, with rules and examples, by Charles C.
  Jewett, Librarian of the Smithsonian Institution, second edition.
  Washington, published by the Smithsonian Institution, 1853, 8vo, pp.
  xii., 96. Since the above was written Mr. Cutter’s Rules have appeared
  (see p. 11), and should be referred to.

Compilers of Catalogues of modern books may content themselves in most
cases with the terms at present in use.[25]

Footnote 25:

  For what these are, and how to know them, I must refer the reader to
  the Smithsonian Report, previously quoted, or to a note by Charles
  Naylor on “the size of a book” in Notes and Queries for 10 Feb., 1872,
  4th s., ix. p. 122.

Novels are generally described in the advertisements as “post octavo,”
which is not octavo at all, but duodecimo. The mis-description is of
little importance, for everybody knows about the size of the modern
three volume novel, a little larger now than at the beginning of the
century.

It is annoying that so small a matter as the size of a book should
occupy so much space. It has always been a subject of difficulty. A
bookseller as such, in his sale catalogues, will describe a book as
12mo, but when he compiles a bibliographical list he will describe it
correctly as octavo, though the actual size is what is looked upon as
duodecimo.

These points are strictly necessary for ordinary catalogues, but they
will not satisfy all enquiries, for we cannot tell from them whether it
is a book or a pamphlet that is described. It is therefore desirable to
add the number of pages. In the paging we have as much variety as in the
sizes, authors, publishers, and printers, not having the slightest
thought for bibliographers, and the infinite trouble of collation.

A book should be paged in as simple a manner as possible. This is a rule
that has never been attended to, and so long as authors do not know
their own minds never can be. If the printer begins the paging
regularly, and the author thinks irregularly, and recollects something
that has been left out, irregular paging will be the result.[26]

Footnote 26:

  The most disorderly book I know in this respect is:—A universal
  alphabet grammar and language, ... by George Edmonds, ... [1856]
  quarto:—The following is the collation. Its length would generally
  preclude its being given in a bibliotheca. First we have the preface
  vii pages, then a table of contents vii pages; the introduction 34
  pages, a half-title unpaged, then 152 pages, then another half-title
  unpaged, then pp. 44 and iii., then corrigenda pp. ix., then a
  half-title and “the Dictionary,” forming a third of the book entirely
  unpaged, then the addenda paged separately pp. 3. Sometimes the
  figures of paging are at the side, sometimes in the middle, sometimes
  at the top and sometimes at the bottom! Timperley in his “Printer’s
  Manual” (1838) p. 18, says, “Running titles may be set to an index,
  but folios are seldom put unless with a view to recommend the book for
  its extraordinary number of pages; for as an index does not refer to
  its own matter by figures, they are needless in this case.” When the
  trouble that a variety of pagings gives the bibliographer, is
  considered, it is to be hoped that the simplicity I recommend will be
  adopted as much as possible.

Always count from the very first printed page belonging to the book,
excluding advertisements. Give the paging as printed, that is, in the
same characters. If leaves occur unpaged, either before those paged or
after, use arabian numerals to denote those unpaged.

Sometimes an octavo book begins with, say xii. numbered pages and then
occur four unnumbered, and then we have page 1 on signature B, numbered
consecutively to page 253, and three pages of appendix and errata
beyond. Describe it thus: octavo pp. xii., and 4, and 253, and 3. But if
4 and 3 are numbered with roman numerals, it should be thus:—octavo, pp.
xii., and iv., 253, iii., because this is more accurate. We use the same
kind of numerals used in the book. It is, however, not a matter of much
moment, provided the correct number of pages is given in the collation.

I do not use the sign plus (xii.+iv.+iii.) because it makes the figures
look more uninteresting, and signs enough occur in the titles
themselves.

The price at which a book is published is often unascertainable, and it
is useful to insert it, though it has nothing to do with its literary or
scientific value. But in this as in every other particular it is
impossible to say what the student may require, and its omission might
make a man of genius waste precious hours which it is the special object
of the true bibliographer to save.

If the price is mentioned on the title page, accuracy requires that it
be given in its regular order, whether at the beginning or end of the
title. Instances will be found in the list of works by a lady at the
end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           STYLE OF PRINTING.

                                -------


I now come to a few minor points of printing, for in a catalogue nothing
is so trivial as not to require attention.

In the previous observations I have treated of things that are
invariable, they must be attended to, in any list of books, there is no
room for exercise of taste, they go to the very root of a good
catalogue, and are laws dictated by accuracy.

But the manner in which a title is printed in a list or catalogue, or
biography is a matter of taste, and we therefore give the following
hints merely as suggestions[27], hoping that they will commend
themselves to all who print title-pages. Have as few capitals as
possible in the title, none except for names of persons or places.
Titles of persons may well be printed without capitals, as prince,
marquess, lord, not Prince, Marquess, Lord.

Footnote 27:

  Most of which have been acted on, if not carried to their fullest
  extent in my study, already referred to: “A bibliographical list of
  lord Brougham’s publications,” printed in Lord Brougham’s Works, ...
  Edinb., A. and C. Black, 1873, vol XI., pp. 463 to 486.

Take for example the following title, which, printed according to the
usual method would be:—

“Speeches by the Lord Chancellor; Lord Brougham, Lord Cottenham; and
Lord Campbell, in The House of Lords, on Tuesday the 9th, August, 1842,
at giving Judgment in the Appeal, the Rev. John Ferguson and others,
Appellants, against the Earl of Kinnoull, and the Rev. R. Young,
Respondents, with the Judgments appended, from Mr. Gurney’s Shorthand
notes,” &c.

I prefer this title-page for catalogue purposes to be printed thus:

Speeches by the lord chancellor [Lyndhurst], lord Brougham, lord
Cottenham, and lord Campbell in the house of lords, on tuesday the
9th august, 1842, at giving judgment in the appeal, the rev. John
Ferguson and others, appellants, against the earl of Kinnoull and
the rev. R. Young, respondents; with the judgment appended from Mr.
Gurney’s shorthand notes. Edinb. James Gall and son [1842], 8o, pp.
36, 1s. The improvement in appearance of this title and the facility
in reading, counterbalance all such objections as that we are
accustomed to Lord, and not lord, or Tuesday, and not tuesday. The
compilers of the [English] Law List have long since discarded
capitals for the names of streets with great advantage, for example
they print, “gray’s-inn-square,” not Gray’s Inn Square: “court of
exchequer”; “house of lords,” &c. The Catalogue of the Advocates
library, lately printed, is a good example; refer for instance to
the title under Bullion, vol I., 1867, p. 763, a title that in
ordinary catalogues would bristle with capitals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              PUNCTUATION.

                                -------


The punctuation should also be carefully considered. Everything in
bibliography is at present very much over punctuated, half, if not two
thirds, might be dispensed with to the lessening of the expense, and the
great advantage in the appearance.

Imagine you are copying a sentence instead of a title page, and
punctuate and put capitals accordingly. If writing that a work was by an
author, nobody would write By, neither need it have a capital for a copy
of a title.

Mr. Henry Stevens has advocated and adopted this method in his later
catalogues and notably in the:—“Bibliotheca geographica and historica or
a catalogue of a nine days sale of rare & valuable ... books ... et
cetera ... with an essay upon the Stevens system of photobibliography by
Henry Stevens GMB [_i.e._ gatherer of musty books] ... [with a
photograph of] Ptolemy’s World by Mercator 1578 Part I. to be dispersed
by auction by Messrs Puttick and Simpson ... London Henry Stevens at the
Nuggetory 4 Trafalgar square July 25 1872.”

The title, which I have abbreviated nearly one third, has upwards of two
hundred words in it without a single mark of punctuation, except after
“Part I.” where it seems to have got in by accident. Throughout his
titles, he uses stops very sparingly. Any word which is complete
requires no stop. Thus: “vols” requires no stop after it, because it is
a finished abbreviation, but vol. does[28].

Footnote 28:

  Mr. Stevens’ work contains an essay on catalogues, teeming with useful
  suggestions, as indeed might be expected from one who has had such
  long and varied experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       THE BEGINNING AND THE END.

                                -------

        The unwise seem to be of opinion that any fool can
          index, but we have already seen that the wise think
          differently.—Wheatley’s What is an index? 1879, p. 41.


The beginning of every book should be a table of contents, or an
analytical table, or both, and the end a good index.

I can scarcely over estimate the importance which I attach to the index.
A book may almost as well be unwritten, as be without an index.

The publications by “a lady,” are exceedingly deficient in indexes. It
is amazing that authors who must have felt the want of indexes in the
works of others should publish their own without such helps.

It would occupy too much space to give all the opinions I have collected
of different authors entreating others never to publish a book without
an index. Allibone never loses an opportunity, in his Dictionary of
English Literature, of impressing upon his readers the importance of
indexes. See more particularly an article of absorbing interest under
the name of Samuel Ayscough of the British Museum, celebrated for his
most useful indexes to Shakespeare, to that grand storehouse of
information “The Gentleman’s Magazine” (obit. 1868), to “the Monthly
Review,” and other works. Of such importance indeed does Allibone
consider indexes, that, not content with insisting on them throughout
his three ponderous volumes, he, on the very last page, gives a note
“Concerning Indexes.” Often a good index obtains for a book a prominent
position it might not otherwise obtain; as, for example, Godfrey
Higgins’s “Anacalypsis,” which is said to be in the reading room of the
British Museum, from its containing[29] “thousands of statements cited
from all quarters, and very well indexed.” What would Watt’s Bibliotheca
Britannica be without its two volumes of index to two volumes of
authors. Bibliographical and biographical works beyond everything
require the most minute indexes.

Footnote 29:

  Athenæum, 2 Aug. 1856, p. 953, quoted by Allibone in his Dictionary,
  p. 843. See also p. 3140, and refer also to Ayscough, Mary Cowden
  Clarke, Godfrey Higgins, John Nichols, and other articles in Allibone
  and to his Alphabetical Index to the New Testament, Phil. [1868],
  published under his initials only.

Formerly I was in love with the scientific look of a number of indexes,
but I am now convinced that two heads are not better than one in this
case and that one index is more useful than two. A person who consults
an index wants to find something as quickly as possible, if there is
only one index he cannot consult the wrong one first.

It has been suggested by Prof. De Morgan that historians by having no
indexes, think to oblige their readers to go through their works from
beginning to end. The contrary being the result.

If book buyers made a rule of not buying a book without an index,
authors and publishers would then supply that want.

Beware, however, of snares, for such there are in this as in all else,
big books with lean, lanky, and starved indexes.

Since the above was written the “Index Society” has come into existence,
and published an indispensable little work, entirely devoted to this
subject entitled: What is an index? a few notes on indexes and indexers
by Henry B. Wheatley ... [motto] London, Longmans 1879. Besides being
useful this is a most amusing book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               OF ERRORS.

                                -------

        What still remains to be taken notice of are the
          _errata’s_,... Sometimes they are put by themselves on
          the even side of a leaf, so as to face the title. But
          though this is very seldom done, it is a pity that it
          should ever have come into the thoughts of anyone to
          do it at all; for it is a maxim to bring errata’s into
          as narrow a compass as we conveniently can, and to put
          them in a place where they can make no great show:
          since it is not to the credit of a book, to find a
          catalogue of its faults annexed. It is therefore wrong
          policy in those who make errata’s appear numerous and
          parading, in hopes of being thought very careful and
          accurate; when they only serve to witness an author’s
          inattention at a time when he should have been of the
          opposite inclination. But the subterfuges that are
          used by writers upon this occasion, are commonly
          levelled at the printer, to make him the author of all
          that is amiss; whereas they ought to ascribe it to
          themselves: ... whoever has any ideas of printing,
          must consequently know that it is impossible to
          practice that art without committing errors; and that
          it is the province of an author to rectify them. For
          these several reasons it will appear how material
          it is not to make an erratum of every trifling
          fault....—John Smith’s Printer’s grammar, 1755, quoted
          in Timperley’s Printer’s Manual, 1838, p. 19.

        Le nouvel _Errata_, je le répète, est long, d’une
          longueur inaccoutumée. Les auteurs semblent avoir
          honte d’avouer les fautes qu’ils ont commises, ou
          qu’on commet pour eux; je n’ai pas cette pudeur
          menteuse; je confesse les fautes de mon livre.—A. JAL:
          préface de la seconde édition du Dict. Crit. de
          Biographie et d’histoire, 1872.


It is next to impossible to avoid errors, more especially in
bibliographical works, with numbers of names and figures. All that can
be done to avoid them, of course, should be; but with the most minute
and constant supervision errors will creep in and oversights occur.

This, however, is no reason for adopting eccentricities. For example,
Professor De Morgan in his “Arithmetical Books,” adopted the singular
plan of giving the dates twice, in figures and in words, the latter
being abbreviated, and after all, as he himself shows, he was still
liable to commit the very errors he desired to provide against.

His plan never has been, and I hope, never will be adopted by any one
else. It is original, but highly inconvenient and unbibliographical in
the extreme. It is to be hoped that if a new edition is ever published
we shall have proper title page information in a proper manner, and be
spared such eccentricities as beginning the title-page from the bottom
instead of the top.

I may here remark that the learned Professor went upon the right
principle, he excluded no book on the ground of unimportance, or
worthlessness. He described no book unless he had seen it, which was
also J. R. McCulloch’s plan in his “Literature of Political Economy”
(1845), but he unfortunately described only select works, without even
giving a brief list of what he considered rubbish, simply saying, “We
have proceeded on a principle of selection; and neglecting the others,
have, with exceptions, noticed those works only which appear to have
contributed to develop sound principles, or to facilitate their
adoption.” The consequence is if we find a book unmentioned by him, it
at once becomes a question whether he excluded it because it was
worthless, or because he had not seen it.

There is a large class of errors arising from the habit of one writer
copying another, instead of each going to original sources.

The errors prevalent in biography and bibliography were pointed out by
Mr. Bolton Corney years ago. I think it is unnecessary for me to give
here any further criticisms on the method which should be pursued. The
student who wishes to go deeper into the subject can refer to Bolton
Corney’s pamphlet: “On the New General Biographical Dictionary,” already
noticed.

The work I have quoted above by M. Jal is a large volume consisting
almost entirely of articles in correction of those existing in other
works.

No statement of any former writer should be taken for granted, if there
is any more original source. Compilers of Dictionaries sin greatly in
this respect. The reason is probably that to be correct requires so much
time and research that it does not pay to be accurate if much time is
consumed.

The safest way to avoid errors would be to compare the proof of every
title page with the book itself, but the labour would be enormous, and I
doubt if it is practicable in most cases. Nevertheless, it is the surest
way. At the same time I would not discourage anybody from attempting a
catalogue or bibliotheca, although nobody can expect to do anything of
much value without accuracy, the greater the accuracy the greater the
value.

Nothing is satisfactory but actual inspection of the books themselves.
We have quite enough of descriptions of books at second, third, or
fourth hand, in nearly all existing works, and it is time now to go upon
“a new and improved principle.” Mr. W. Carew Hazlitt in the preface to
his “Collections and Notes,” 1876, has some interesting remarks on this
subject to which the student can refer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ON THE MEANS OF IDENTIFYING THE AUTHORS OF ANONYMOUS AND PSEUDONYMOUS
                             PUBLICATIONS.

                                -------


It constantly happens that “a lady,” in one of her later publications
will mention a former one. In this case it is necessary to look at the
publication so referred to, when it will be ascertained if it is
anonymous. Works are also advertised at the end of others, either as
published, or forthcoming, and these works themselves must all be looked
at.

A most extensive library is requisite for references such as these.
Indeed, it frequently happens that the works required cannot be found
even in the enormous library of the British Museum.

To take the following as an example, in Mrs. H. Mozley’s: Louisa, or the
bride, by the author of the fairy bower [motto]. London, James Burns,
Portman street, and Henry Mozley & sons, Derby, 1842, 12o, pp. 302.

It is pseudonymous. We find advertised at the end by the same author:
Bessie Gray, or the dull child. Hymns for children on the Lord’s Prayer,
our duty to God and scripture history. Robert Marshall, or the cleverest
boy in the school. The Stanley Ghost. The old Bridge. Some published,
others in the press, none of them, however, have I (1872), been able to
find in the Catalogue of the Library of the British Museum[30]. They may
be there nevertheless.

Footnote 30:

  I have lately (May 1880) searched again, but still do not find them.

As another example, I have traced the following works to the same
author, without, however, ascertaining the author’s name.

Spain yesterday and to-day, by a lady, London, Harvey and Darton
[1829?], sm. 8o.—Portugal, or the young travellers, ... 1830.—The new
estate, or the young travellers in Wales and Ireland, by the author of
Portugal, ... 1831.—The East Indians at Selwood, or the orphans’ home,
by the author of Portugal; the new estate, &c., &c., Lond. Darton and
Harvey, 1834, small 12o.—Gleanings from many fields, by the author of
Portugal, the new estate, &c., &c., Lond., Darton and Harvey, 1834, 12o.

Sometimes it is possible to make a tolerably certain guess at the
author, from the similarity in style, or some trick of the author, as in
the punctuation, or the use of italics, as by Archbishop Whately, or the
constant use of the dash, as in the works of James Flamank.

But in all cases corroborative evidence is necessary. For how wrong a
guess of this kind may be has been amply illustrated in Notes and
Queries.

Every celebrated man has had numerous publications attributed to him by
people who professed themselves quite certain of the authorship, from
the style and subject matter.

There is at present no book which will give any help in an investigation
like the present. In the “Handbook of Fictitious Names,” at pages 7 and
8, only seven real names of ladies are revealed, with a note to the
effect that there were upwards of fifty works unknown.

The very useful series of catalogues published by Messrs. Bent, Hodgson,
and Sampson Low, the English Catalogue of the latter being the best of
the kind, afford great assistance.

The London catalogue of books, 1814-1851, has a classified index, and in
this anonymous works are frequently attributed to their real authors,
though without any indication of their anonymity.

The British catalogue also has a subject index.

The following include the majority of publications from 1800 to the
present time, except pamphlets and privately printed works.

The London catalogue of books ... since the year 1800 to March 1827,
Lond. pub. for the executor of the late W. Bent by Longman &c. 1827, 8o.

The London catalogue ... 1814 to 1846.

The London catalogue ... 1816 to 1851, Lond., Thomas Hodgson 13
Paternoster row and sold by Longman &c., 1851, 8o.

The classified index to the London catalogue ... 1816 to 1851, London T.
Hodgson 1853, 8o.

The British catalogue of books published from oct. 1837, to dec. 1852
... by Sampson Low, vol. 1. general alphabet, Lond. S. Low & son, 1853.

In this the dates of publication were added for the first time. The
author published an Index to the above in 1858, in which he acknowledges
the assistance of Dr. Crestadoro.

The English catalogue of books, published from january, 1835, to
january, 1863, comprising the contents of the “London” and the “British”
catalogues, and the principal works published in the United States of
America and Continental Europe ... compiled by Sampson Low [and
assistants], London, S. Low Son & Marston, 1864, r. 8o. And
continuations to the present time. So that we thus have names of authors
and index of subjects from 1814 to the present time. For the years from
1800 to 1814, Watt’s Bibliotheca Britannica can be referred to.

I will now give an illustration.

Information we will say, for example, is sent to the following effect:—

“Sir,—Seeing that you are collecting, with a view to publication, names
of authors of the nineteenth century, I beg to say that I was well
acquainted with Miss Seaman, who died about the year 1830, a notice of
whom you will find in the Ryde papers. She wrote ‘Some Observations on
Girl’s Schools and Boarding Schools,’ but whether with her name or not I
forget. Also, about 1822, was published, by Smith of London, an
interesting religious tale called Lily, and in 16o, 1825, a capital
little work on the choice of books, with advice about Miss Edgeworth’s
Novels.”

It will be evident to anyone that the whole of the above requires
verification, a labour of hours, perhaps days, which might have been
saved by a little bibliographical knowledge on the part of our
informant.

On investigation it appears, then, that our informant has scarcely given
a single date or title correctly.—1. Miss Seaman died in 1829, not
1830.—2. The reference to the Ryde papers is useless, as too wide for
verification, and inaccessible.—3. The title of each of her works is
given from recollection, or rather, from no recollection, and they are
all incorrect.—4. The titles are made up.—5. Words not in the
title-pages are interpolated without notice.—6. The size of the book is
placed before the date—_i.e._ it is interpolated, and in fact everything
is reversed.

The above information might be best put in this form.

SEAMAN (Lucy) the daughter of a Captain in the Royal Navy, born at Ryde,
the 23 May, 1801, wrote several works which are held in high estimation,
and died of consumption on the 15 September, 1829. The following are the
only publications I know of from her pen; but as she published without
giving her name, there are probably others that are unknown.

(1.) Remarks on education, as at present conducted, especially with
reference to private tuition and the system of boarding schools for
young ladies, London (printed at Ryde), for the author, 1822, 12mo, pp.
iv. 33, anon.

The authoress says, that her father’s early death making her, while very
young, acquainted with the routine of teaching, was the cause of her
publishing these remarks.

(2.) Little Lily, a moral tale for children, by a lady, author of
Remarks, &c., Lond. J. Smith, 1823, 8o, pp. 115, 2s 6d, pseudon.

This is the first edition of this excellent little book, the second and
subsequent editions of which were published with her name.

We observe that a book entitled “Little Lily’s travels, Lond. Nelson,
1860,” has been published; but it is a different work to the above.

(3.) Miss Maria Edgeworth’s tales compared with other works of fiction;
to which is added advice for the selection, and a list of works most
suitable for children, by the author of Little Lily, &c., Lond., J.
Smith, 1826 [1825], 18o, pp. xi and 200, 3s, auton.

In this she complains of her failing health, and expresses her great
respect for the writings of her friend Miss Edgeworth.

Here it will be observed that the first work is strictly anonymous, as
the abbreviation “anon,” indicates, that is to say, it has no name on
the title-page, nor any name, pseudonym, nor initials to the preface;
and has in fact no clue whatever as to who is the author, as the
reference to her in the imprint cannot be considered such. But from the
book being printed at Ryde for the author, though published in London,
it may be inferred that she resided at Ryde at the time.

The second work is pseudonymous, as the abbreviation “pseudon,”
indicates.

The third work would appear also by the title-page to be pseudonymous,
it is not so, as the preface is signed by the authoress, and the
abbreviation “auton,” warns us that it is autonymous.

In conclusion, I hope that my observations will not dishearten the
student who is ambitious of being bibliographical. Let every one strive
to do his best. But let no man suppose he can make a good catalogue
simply from his desire to do so and without previous study. It is no use
saying a man must be accurate, he cannot until he has studied the art of
bibliography, and learned what has already been done in that science; so
that by taking note of the errors of his predecessors, he may attempt a
catalogue on the most modern and improved principles, and thereby
contribute towards the advancement and improvement of bibliography.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        LIST OF WORKS BY A LADY.

                                -------

        “Bibliography is a dry occupation,—a caput mortuum,—it
          is a borrowed production, which brings very little
          grist to the mill; and so difficult and tedious is the
          object, of laying before our eyes all the real or
          reported copies or editions of the works enumerated,
          that almost every line of our reports may be suspected
          of falsehood.”—James Atkinson, Medical Bibliography,
          1834, 8o [he stopped with letter B].

        It is probable that every great national library
          contains more works without authors’ names than with
          them. Of these anonymous books, a considerable
          proportion will, doubtless, belong to authors whose
          names are either known to, or conjectured, more or
          less plausibly, by the learned bibliographer. But if
          conjecture be allowed to govern the _place_ of a book
          in a catalogue, all reliability on it ceases.—Edward
          Edwards, in the Encyclopædia Britannica, eighth
          edition, 1857, Art. Libraries, p. 378.


1. An account of the celebration of the jubilee, on the 25th oct. 1809,
being the 49th anniversary of the reign of Geo. III. ... collected and
published by a lady. Birmingham [1809], 4o.

    I should observe that I have not, out of regard to space, put in the
      pagination, price, &c., and that nearly all the places of
      publication are abbreviated. I have seen every book which I here
      describe, mostly in the Library of the British Museum.

2. Ailzie Grierson ... by a lady. Edin. Johnstone 1846, 16o.

3. Almeda, or the Neapolitan revenge, a tragic drama, by a lady. Lond.
Symonds 1801, 8o.

    This is in five acts and in verse. The advertisement states that
      part of the plot, which relates to the revenge of the Countess
      (Almeda) was taken from the “Life of Rozelli.”—The author’s name
      was not known to the editors of the Biographia Dramatica 1812.

4. An alphabet of animals, by a lady. Lond. 1865.

5. An anecdotal memoir of the princess royal of England from her birth
to her marriage [with prince Frederick William of Prussia] by a lady.
Lond. Houlston 1858, small 12o.

    Prefixed are some verses signed “Mary Bennett.”

6. Anecdotes of animals selected by a lady for the amusement of her
children. Lond. Darton and Harvey 1832, square 16o.

7. An appeal to the women of England to discourage the stage, by a lady.
Lond. Joseph Masters 1855, 24o.

8. The arithmetical class-book, or preparatory studies in arithmetic, by
a lady; for the use of schools, and particularly designed as an
assistant for female teachers. Lond. Harvey and Darton 1824, 12o, pp.
IV. 62.

    In the preface, dated from “Clapham road place,” the authoress says
      she has had long experience. This little work is not mentioned by
      De Morgan in his list of Arithmetical books.

9. The Astrologer, a legend of the Black Forest, by a lady [motto] in
two volumes. Lond. Saunders & Otley 1846.

10. The beauties of scripture history for the use of young persons
learning English, by a lady. Paris, Ch. Duniol, 29 rue de Tournon 1855.

11. Beauty, what it is, and how to retain it, by a lady: a companion
volume to [but not by the authoress of] How to dress on £15 a year....
Lond. Warne [1873] 12o.

12. The book of costumes, or annals of fashion ... by a lady of rank,
illustrated ... new edit. Lond. Colburn 1847.

13. The boy’s own text book, containing a text from the old and new
Testaments ... selected by a lady [motto] Lond. J. F. Shaw 1857.

    I need scarcely say that this has nothing in common with “_The_
      Boys’ Own Book,” as to which I had a note in “Notes & Queries” of
      27 April, 1878, p. 329. See no. 71.

14. A brief guide to happiness [through religion] by a lady, 2nd edit.
revised. Lond. Hope & Co. 1851.

15. Buds and blossoms, or stories of children, by a lady. Lond. Hatchard
[1842?]. The same work, only anonymous, was also published by
Groombridge 1852.

16. Caroline and her mother ... principally upon entomological subjects,
by a lady [mottoes] Lond. Hatchard 1827.

17. Catechism for the use of young people [motto] by a lady. Paris,
published by Galignani 1834.

18. A catechism of the history of England, by a lady. Lond. Dolman 1850.

    One of a series called Dolman’s [Catholic] catechisms. The history
      of France and Germany in the same series are written by A. M. S.,
      and are attributed, with a query, at the British Museum, to Agnes
      M. Stewart.

19. Cato, or interesting adventures of a dog, interspersed with real
anecdotes, by a lady, author of Infant’s friend—Easy rhymes, &c. [motto]
3rd edition. Lond. J. Harris, St. Pauls’ churchyard [1820?] 12o, pp.
175.

    Dedicated to “my little girl,” by her mother. “Easy rhymes” appears
      to be the only one of the above three works in the London
      Catalogue.

20. The child’s guide to knowledge ... by a lady.

    The 2nd edit. 1828, the 39th edit. Lond. Simpkin, 1866.

21. The child’s manual of prayer, by a lady ... Lond. Dolman 1849.
Approved ✠ by Nicholas, bishop of Melipotamus.

22. The child’s own book on New-church doctrine, by a lady. Lond. 1837.

23. The child’s pathway through the history of England, by a lady,
second edition. Lond. Jarrold (Norwich printed) [1858?]

    The preface is signed Ida, Nottingham, 1855, and I think it may
      safely be assumed that the authoress lived there.

24. The child’s treasure, or reading without spelling effectually
simplified ... by a lady. Lond. C. H. Law, 1851.

25. Choice descriptive poetry ... selected by a lady. Lond. Whittaker,
Birmingham (printed) [1852].

26. Chollerton ... by a lady. Lond. Ollivier 1846, 8o, pp. 381.

27. The christian’s daily preacher ... by a lady [motto] Weymouth, 1826.

28. Christmas 1846 and the new year 1847 in Ireland, letters from a
lady; edited by W. S. Gilly ... price one shilling: the proceeds of the
sale to be given towards relieving the distress in Ireland. Durham,
Andrews, 1847, 12o.

    “A lady,” not wishing her name published, the editor puts his as a
      guarantee of good faith.

29. A compendium of ancient geography, compiled for the young princess
M. L. B*N*P**TE de M⸺T, intended as a sequel to the abbé Gaultier’s
excellent Modern geography, as a companion to “Tales of the Classics,”
and inscribed to governesses ... by a lady. Lond. Hailes, 1835.

30. A compendium of British geography, with questions, by a lady, the
author of First lessons in geography. Lond. Hailes 1828(?)

31. Compendium of universal history, by the author of 1000 questions on
the old and new Testaments. Lond. Jarrold 1844.

    In both the London and English Catalogues, said to be by “a lady,”
      but those words do not occur on the title.

32. Conversations on important scriptural subjects by, a lady. Lond.
Ford, Islington 1837, 16o, pp. 102.

33. Conversations on the lord’s prayer, by a lady [motto] Lond.
Simpkin—Benson and Barling. Weymouth [1851?]

    The illustration is signed E. J. P.

34. Cookery made easy, by a lady [1841?] 11 edit. 1854.

    We have from this author: Cheap, nice, and nourishing cookery, or
      how working people may live well upon a small income ... by the
      author of “Cookery made easy.” Lond. Dean [1841].

35. The cottage home ... by a lady. Lond. [1864].

36. The cottager’s assistant, or the wedding present, 2nd edit., ... by
a lady, price 2s. 6d. with plates. Lond. Rodwell & Martin 1824, 12o, pp.
VIII. & 47.

    Inscribed to the Viscountess Cremorne.

37. A course of ... prayers ... selected by a lady. Lond. Lyntot, price
2s. 6d., 1804, 8o.

38. Cousin Rachel’s visit, by a lady. Wellington, Salop, printed by and
for Houlston, London 1827.

39. The Cousins, being amusing and instructive lessons in the French
language, 2 parts. Lond. Derby, printed [1850].

40. Craigh-Melrose priory; or memoirs of the Mount Linton family, a
novel in four vols, by a lady. Lond. Chapple 1815.

41. The crucifixion, a poem ... by a lady. Lond. Cadell 1817.

42. Daily bread, or a text of scripture ... selected by a lady. 2nd
edit.... Liverpool 1821.

    The same published by Seeley, Lond. and Grapel, Liverpool, 1840.

43. Dartmoor legends and other poems, by a lady. Exeter, Roberts 1857.

    Dedicated to her father’s friend Arthur Howe Holdsworth.

44. Dates of the kings of England, in easy triplets, by a lady. Lond.
[1874].

45. Domestic economy and cookery, for rich and poor ... English, Scotch,
French, Oriental and other foreign dishes ... by a lady. Lond. John
Murray 1827, 12o.

    Several editions to the present time, and if not the first, at all
      events one of the earliest was published by Longmans.

46. An earnest address to young communicants, by a lady. Lond.
Rivingtons 1865.

    Dedicated by permission to the bishop of Oxford.

47. Easy and familiar sermons for children, by a lady. Lond. printed for
the author, Crew and Spencer, 27 Lamb’s conduit street and Simpkin and
Marshall 1830.

48. Easy lessons in the history of England, by a lady, third edit. Lond.
Harvey & Darton 1839.

49. Easy questions and answers from the Pentateuch ... by a lady [1855].

50. Economical cookery for young housekeepers ... by a lady. Lond. 1824,
4th edit. R. Clarke 1839.

51. Educational outlines and other letters on practical duties, to which
is added a journal of a summer’s excursion made by the author and her
pupils, by a lady. Lond. Groombridge 1850, 8o, pp. 8 and 116, with an
illustration of Versailles.

52. Edward Beaumont, or the efficacy of prayer, a narrative founded on
facts, by a lady. [motto] Dublin, S. B. Oldham,—Whittaker, Lond. 1844.

53. Effie’s and the Doctor’s tales ... by a lady, with (five)
illustrations by the same. Lond. Darton [1859]

54. Eight days’ journey to Matlock, by a lady. Wakefield, printed for
John Robinson, Express Office 1860.

55. An elementary compendium of music for the use of schools, by a lady.
Lond. John Murray 1835, quarto, pp. VII. and 72, price 12s.

56. Emily Trevor, or the Vale of Elwy, by a lady. Lond. Simpkin, Denbigh
(printed by) T. Gee 1850.

    This is inscribed to Mrs. Maconochie of Meadow-bank house.

57. English history, in the way of question and answer, by a lady, new
edit. Lond. [1839?].

58. The English mother, or early lessons on the church of England, by a
lady [mottoes] Bath (printed) W. Pocock. Lond. Simpkin 1840, 8o, pp.
xii, 84: list of subscribers.

59. Enquiries for the truth between the divided church militant
denominated Roman and Protestant, by a lady. Canterbury (printed by)
Henry Ward. Lond. Hatchard 1851.

60. Esthwaite water, a poem in three parts ... by a lady. Lond.
Whittaker: Kendal (printed by) J. Hudson 1854, 8o, pp. 44, with an
engraving signed W. Banks, _sc._ Edin.

61. Every lady her own cook; or a few practical hints as to how the
patent Crimean cooking stove can be used to the best advantage, by a
lady. Dublin, McGlashan 1857.

62. Every lady’s guide to her own greenhouse ... by a lady. Lond. Orr
1851.

63. An explanation of the ten commandments, by a lady; revised by a
clergyman of the church of England. Lond. Tabart 1802, small 12o, pp.
40.

64. An explanation of the two sacraments and the occasional rites and
ceremonies of the church of England, in a series of dialogues between a
mother (Mrs. Vernon) and her daughters (Louisa and Mary) intended for
the use of young persons. Lond. John Murray 1828, 8o. pp. XI. and 1 and
271.

    Inscribed to Mr. Justice Parke.

    As catalogued by Lowndes in the “British Librarian,” p. 782, this
      little work well illustrates some of my previous observations.
      Lowndes gives part of the title, and afterwards puts a note in the
      words of the rest of the title. His date is later than mine, but
      he does not say it is a new edition. The following is a copy of
      Lowndes’ entry:—“629. An Explanation of the Two Sacraments and the
      occasional Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, by a
      Lady, London, 1831, sm. 8vo, publ. at 5s. 6d. A series of
      dialogues between a mother and her daughters, intended for the use
      of young persons.”

65. Extracts of letters to a christian friend, by a lady, with an
introductory essay by Thos. Erskine, esq., advocate, author of “Remarks
on the internal evidences for the truth of revealed religion,” etc.,
etc. R. B. Lusk Greenock. Glasgow 1830.

66. Familiar dialogues, on interesting subjects ... by a lady. Lond.
Rivington 1821.

    It might occur to any one that the publishers would give the
      author’s name, my enquiries from this source were so constantly
      and uniformly unsuccessful that I never resort to publishers now.

67. Flora and Thalia, or germs of flowers and poetry; being an
alphabetical arrangement of flowers, with appropriate poetical
illustrations [selected from various authors] embellished with coloured
plates (M. Spratt del.): by a lady [motto] Lond. Washbourne 1835, small
12o, pp. XII. 200.

    Dedicated by permission to the duchess of Kent and the princess
      Victoria. The preface is addressed from “King’s road Chelsea.”

68. Florence Nightingale and the Russian war, a poem, by a lady. Lond.
Hatchard 1856.

    The authoress says “she had the honour of being nearly connected
      with one of the greatest naval commanders of the age in which he
      lived.”

69. Footprints for little christians, by a lady, price sixpence.
Salisbury. Lond. Simpkin [1860].

70. Garden of language [motto] London, Fisher son & co. Newgate street
1835, 16o, pp. 31, with illustrations.

    This is a sort of English grammar, and is said in the London
      Catalogue to be by a lady.

71. The girls’ own text book, containing a text ... for every morning
and evening in the year: selected by a lady. Lond. J. F. Shaw 1858, 32o,
see no 13.

72. Glimpses of natural history, by a lady [motto] London, Darton &
Harvey (1843) [afterwards bought by R. Clarke] square 16o, pp. VI. 199,
with illustrations, some signed J. B.

73. A glimpse of Oriental Nature, pictures with verses by a lady, with a
preface by ... G. R. Gleig. Lond. Dean & Son 1865, 4o.

74. Grandmamma’s first catechism, by a lady, second edition. Oxford
(printed) and London, J. H. Parker 1854, 24o, pp. 23.

75. “Guess if you can”! a collection of enigmas and charades in verse,
together with 50 in the French language, by a lady. Lond. Bogue 1851,
8o.

76. A guide for the sick chamber, consisting of prayers, hymns and
portions of scripture selected ... by a lady. Edinburgh 1837, 12o.

77. Harp of Salem, a collection of historical poems from the scriptures,
together with some reflective pieces, by a lady. Edinb. James Taylor,
Smith & co. Hunter square 1827, 12o, pp. v. 224.

78. The history of David the King of Israel, in two parts, by a lady
[motto] London, printed by H. Teape, Tower hill, sold by Blanchard, City
road; Kent, Hamilton; and Keene, Dublin 1817, 12o, pp. 4 and 184.

    The advertisement states that this was originally written for the
      Youths Magazine, and that the first part appeared in the tenth
      volume of that publication.

79. The home book, or young housekeeper’s assistant, forming a complete
system of domestic economy and household accounts, with estimates of
expenditure, &c., &c., in every department of housekeeping founded on
forty-five years’ experience, by a lady [motto] London, Smith, Elder &
co. 1829, 12o, pp. VII. 175.

    Starts upon the assumption that the lady’s husband has not less than
      £1000 a year.

80. Hours with the Leslies, a tale for children, and Phantasie’s
birthday, a fairy tale, by a lady. London, Hope & co. 16 Great
Marlborough street 1853 [1852] large 16o, pp. 4 and 200.

81. How to dress on £15 a year as a lady, by a lady [Mrs. Millicent
Whiteside Cook] Lond. Warne 1873.

    This little work was the subject of a Chancery suit, Warne the
      original publisher against Routledge, the publisher of a second
      edition before Warne’s was exhausted. Mrs. Cook’s royalty was one
      penny per copy sold, and Warne very shortly paid her £100.—See Law
      Reports. Master of the Rolls 12 June 1874 xviii. 497.

82. Hymns and thoughts for the sick and lonely, by a lady. London.
Nisbet [Bath 1848] 12o.

    New edition Nisbet 1859.

83. Hymns for times of sickness and sorrow selected from various authors
by a lady, the profits of the work will be given to the Cholera orphan
home, Ham Common near Richmond ... London, Wertheim and Macintosh 24
Paternoster row [1849] small 12o, pp. 34.

    Inscribed to rev. Joseph Brown, rector of Christ church, Surrey,
      dated from Keythorpe Hall.

84. Ines, and other poems [motto] London, printed for Allman 1816, 8o,
pp. 4 and 208.

    The London Catalogue says this is by a lady, but those words do not
      occur on the title.

85. Jesus the Messiah, or the Old testament prophecies fulfilled in the
New testament scriptures, by a lady, the profits to be devoted to
charitable purposes. London, Seeley and Burnside 1828, 12o, pp. XIX.
264.

    Dedicated to the right rev. Charles Richard lord bishop of
      Winchester.

86. The juvenile gardener written by a lady, for the use of her own
children, with a view of giving them an early taste for the pleasures of
a garden and the study of botany [motto] Lond. printed for Harvey and
Darton and sold by John Rodford, Hull 1824, 12o, pp. 126.

87. Kaisersworth Deaconesses, including a history of the Institution:
the ordination service and questions for self examination, by a lady.
Lond. Masters 1857, 12o.

88. The ladies’ guide to life assurance: briefly shewing the necessity
for its more extended practice amongst the female community, by a lady.
Lond. Partridge, Oakey & co. 34 Paternoster row 1854, 18o, pp. 32.

    It is dedicated by permission to the duchess of Hamilton and
      Brandon. The preface is signed J. B. and dated Greenwich 24 Nov.
      1854.

89. The lady’s guide to the ordering of her household and the economy of
the dinner table, by a lady. London, Smith & Elder 1861, 8o, pp. XVI.
500.

90. Letters on confirmation, a manual of moral and religious duties,
designed for the young of her own sex in the upper ranks of society, by
a lady. London, Cleaver 1846, 16o.

91. Letters to my unknown friends, by a lady. Lond. printed for Longman,
&c. 1846, 8o, pp. VI. 294; also 1849 and 1853.

    Also author of Some passages in Modern history.

92. The life of Mary, mother of our Lord ... by a lady. Lond. 1851, 8o.

93. Lilias, or fellowship with God ... by a lady [with an introduction
by ... C. B. Tayler] Edin. 1859, 8o.

94. Lines addressed to prince Leopold of Saxe-Cobourg on the death of
his consort the princess Charlotte of Wales, by a lady. Colchester,
printed and sold by Swinborne and Walter; Hatchard, London 1817, 8o, pp.
7.

95. Little Christian’s sunday alphabet, by a lady, woodcuts. 1849, 16o.

96. Mandeville, or the Lynmouth visitors, Barnstaple printed by
Brightwell & son, sold also by Longman & co., Whittaker & co., Lond.;
Roberts, Exeter; Nettleton, Plymouth 1839, 8o, pp. VII. 164.

97. Mary Queen of Scots, an historical ballad with other poems by a
lady. Lond. printed for John Stockdale, Piccadilly 1800, 16o, pp. 89,
2s. 6d.

98. Method for teaching plain needlework in schools, by a lady (second
edition). London, Robert Hardwicke 192 Piccadilly [1861] 8o.

    The title page is lithographed. The preface is signed M. E. B.,
      Decr. 1861. I have not seen the first edition of 1857. The
      authoress says she received her information thirty years before
      1861.

99. Metrical remembrances, by a lady [motto from Isaiah xl. 29] London
1832, 16o.

    No publisher’s name, S. Bagster, Junr. printer.

100. Modern household cookery, a new work for private families, by a
lady, with an introduction on the philosophy of cookery. London, Nelson
1860, 8o, pp. XV. 396, and plates.

101. The modern cookery, written upon the most approved and economical
principles, and in which every receipt has stood the test of experience,
by a lady, second edition, with considerable additions by the author.
Derby, printed by and for Henry Mozley 1820, 12o.

102. Murray’s modern cookery book. Modern domestic cookery based on the
well-known works of Mrs. Rundell, but including all the recent
improvements in the culinary art: founded on principles of economy and
practical knowledge and adapted for private families, by a lady, with
illustrative woodcuts. Lond. John Murray 1851, 8o, XXVIII. 675.

    “The arrangement of the whole work, previously enriched with the
      valuable contributions of the late Miss Emma Roberts (whose
      receipts are marked E. R.) has been placed under the careful
      inspection of a lady well versed in the art of which it treats.
      The book has had the further advantage of being thoroughly revised
      by a professional gentleman of great repute in London, who has
      also supplied several valuable receipts.”—Preface.

103. Moral maxims from the wisdom of Jesus the son of Sirach, or the
Ecclesiasticus, selected by a lady, and enriched with six engravings
from drawings of her own. Lond. Harris 1807.

104. My Norske note book; or a month in Norway, by a lady. Lond.
Westerton 1860 [1859] 8o.

105. Natural history of quadrupeds, for children ... by a lady, 2nd
edit., with plates. Lond. Harvey and Darton 1824, 12o, 4s. 3rd edit.
182‒?

106. The new estate, or the young travellers in Wales and Ireland, by
author of Portugal, &c. Lond. printed for Darton and Harvey 1831, 12o,
pp. VII. 302, with illustrations.

    The same names and persons occur in “The young travellers in
      Portugal.” The authoress acknowledges having availed herself of a
      small work called “Fairy Legends” [by Croker] in speaking of
      popular superstitions. The “New Estate” is in Ireland.

107. The Orb of light; or the Apocalyptic vision (with the text of the
Revelation) by a lady. Lond. Wertheim, 1860, 8o.

108. Original fables [in verse] by a lady; dedicated to her royal
highness the princess Charlotte of Wales, embellished with fifty-four
elegant engravings on wood. Lond. printed for B. Crosby & co. 1810; 12o,
other editions 1812 and 1815.

109. Outlines of truth by a lady. London, Hatchard 1825, 12o.

110. The philanthropist, or selfishness and benevolence illustrated: a
tale, by a lady [mottoes] London, Wm. Ball 1836, 8o, pp. VI. 389.

    Announced as by the same author ‘The spirit of sectarianism,’ 8o,
      pp. 75, 1s. 6d. This is a different work to the Philanthropist by
      P. S. Goss.

111. Plain lectures on Genesis for family reading, by a lady. Lond.
Pickering 1841, 8o.

112. Poems for children, by a lady. Lond. Darton and Harvey 1834, 12o,
pp. IV. 66.

113. A poetical picture of America, being observations made during a
residence of several years at Alexandria and Norfolk in Virginia ...
1799 to 1807, by a lady. London, printed for the author and sold by
Vernor Hood & Sharpe 31 Poultry 1809, small 8o, pp. 14 and 177.

    W. Wilson, printer, St. John’s square. It has a list of subscribers.

114. Portions of Scripture, with ... a view to promote the observance of
the Lord’s day, by a lady. Lond. J. Hatchard & Son 1837, price 3d, or 2s
6d a dozen, 12o, pp. 12.

115. Portugal, or the young travellers, being some account of Lisbon and
its environs, and of a tour in the Alemtéjo; from a journal kept by a
lady during three years’ actual residence. Lond. Darton & Harvey 1830,
12o.

116. Private memoirs of the Court of Louis XVIII. by a lady, 2 vols
Lond. Colburn 1830, 8o.

117. Prayers, hymns, and texts, by a lady. Lond. Seeley 1846, 12o.

118. Ravensdale, a tale by a lady [of Dublin] 2 vols. Dublin, Curry &
co.; Lond. Longman 1845, 12o.

119. Recollections of a seven years’ residence at the Mauritius or Isle
of France, by a lady. London, James Cawthorn 1830, 8o, pp. XI. 208.

    The work is dedicated to Ellen & Mary. The preface is signed by
      their “Mother.” She speaks of her daughters as orphans.

120. The Redeemed Rose, or Willies rest, by a lady. Lond. 1853, 8o.

121. A residence at Sierra Leone, described from a journal kept on the
spot and from letters written to friends at home, by a lady [edited by
the Hon. C. E. S. Norton] Lond. 1849, 16o.

    One of Murray’s Home and Colonial Library.

122. The restoration of the works of art to Italy, a poem by a lady
[motto] Oxford, printed by W. Baxter for R. Pearson High street, Oxford,
and J. Ebers, Old Bond street, London 1816, 8o, pp. 23.

123. Return to my native village; and other poems chiefly on sacred
subjects, by a lady. Oxford and Lond. Parker 1853, 16o.

124. The Rev. Jabez Bunting, or begging; with other poems by a lady,
printed at the request of friends of the authoress. William Illingworth,
printer, top of Kirkgate, Leeds 1833; entered at Stationers’ Hall, 12o,
pp. 14.

125. The rich old bachelor, a domestic tale [in verse] in the style of
Dr. Syntax [by W. Combe] by a lady [motto] Ward, Printer, Canterbury
1824, 8o, pp. 312.

126. The Sceptic, by a lady. Lond. J. Russell Smith 1850, 8o, pp. VIII.
168.

    Crewkerne (Somersetshire) printed by G. P. R. Pulman, Market-place.

127. A scriptural guide to the duties of every-day life ... compiled by
a lady. Lond. Saunders and Otley 1846, 12o.

128. Selina, a novel, founded on facts, by a lady, in three volumes.

                  ⸺ Is there not a hand,
      Which operates unseen, and regulates
      The vast machine we tread on? Dr. Hurdis.

Lond. printed for C. Law Ave maria lane, by Bye and Law, St.
John’s-square, Clerkenwell 1800, 12o.

    The authoress’s first work.

129. A series of reflections on the sacred oratorio of the Messiah [by
Handel] by a lady. London, Hatchard 1812, 8o.

    For full title see the British Critic, XL. 201.

130. The siege of Mansoul a drama in five acts [and in verse] the
diction of which consists altogether in an accommodation of words from
Shakespeare and other poets, by a lady [motto] Bristol, sold by W.
Bulgin No. 3 Wine street, sold also by Matthews, strand. Longman, &c.,
Lond.; and S. Hazard, Bath 1801, 8o, VI. 82.

    “The composition of a lady now deceased.” Part of the preface is
      written by the Rev. H. Sulger. It is not in Baker’s Biog.
      Dramatica, 1812.

131. Sketch of ancient geography, by a lady for the use of her own
pupils. Brighton & Lond. Whittaker 1857, 8o.

132. Spain yesterday and to-day, by a lady. Lond. Harvey & Darton [1829]
sm. 8o.

133. The stepping stone to astronomy, by a lady. Longmans 1858, 16o.

134. Suspirium sanctorum, or holy breathings, a series of prayers for
every day in the month, by a lady. Lond. Saunders & Otley 1826, 8o.

135. Tales from the German, by a lady. Lond. Anderson [1825?] 8o.

136. Tales of the classics, a new delineation of the most popular
fables, legends and allegories commemorated in the works of poets,
painters and sculptors, selected and written by a lady for the amusement
and instruction of her own daughters [mottoes] in three volumes. London,
Colburn and Bentley, 1830, 12o, vol I. XXIV. 302, vol. II. IV. 302, vol
III. 370 the pagination of the appendix is continuous.

    Dedicated to H.R.H. the princess Victoria of Kent, dated from
      “Wadlands,” July 1829.

137. A text book [religious] for the sick and afflicted, selected by a
lady. Lond. J. F. Shaw 1858, 16o.

138. Tales original and translated from the Spanish, by a lady,
embellished with eight engravings on wood. London J. J. Stockdale, 41
Pall Mall 1810, 8o, pp. 391.

    Dedicated by the publisher to Anna Eliza Chandos, Countess Temple.
      The advertisement dated from Whitchurch, Hampshire, states that
      these are the production of a young lady unknown in the
      metropolis, and unused to writing for the public.

139. Thoughts on our national calamity in a letter to a friend in
Ireland, by a lady [motto] London, Rivington 1817, 8o, pp. 66.

    On the death of the princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales.

140. Translations and sketches of biography from the German, Italian,
Spanish, Portuguese, and French languages, by a lady. Lond. Saunders &
Otley 1839, 8o.

141. Twelve years ago, a tale, by [a lady] the author of Letters to
unknown friends. Lond. Longman 1847, 16o.

142. Twice Married, my own story, by a lady. Lond. Ward & Lock 1855, 8o.

143. Two fairy tales in a dramatic form, by a lady [Miss Clode formerly
of Wooton under Edge?] Lond. A. Hall 1851, 12o.

144. Variety, a collection of original poems, by a lady. London, printed
by J. Davison, White-friars, for James Wallis, Paternoster row, and
Christopher and Jennet, Stockton 1802, small 8o, pp. VIII., 167 and 1.

145. “Vater Unser,” a tale for children, illustrative of the Lord’s
prayer, translated freely from the German, by a lady. Lond. Whittaker &
Co. 1844, 12o, pp. 48.

    Dedicated to A**** M***** B******, a child of seven years old, by
      her mother.

146. Village incidents, or religious influence in domestic scenes by a
lady. London, Hatchard 1828, 12o, pp. VIII. 145.

147. Woman as a virgin, wife, and mother, by a lady. Lond. Mitchell
[1838] 16o, 1s. 6d.

148. A word in favor of female schools, addressed to parents guardians
and the public at large, by a lady [motto] London, Longman 1826, 24o,
pp. 74, 2s. 6d.

149. Workwoman’s guide; containing instructions in cutting out and
completing those articles of wearing apparel, etc., which are actually
made at home, etc. Lond. Simpkin, Birmingham, print. 1838, 4to.

    New edit. Simpkin 1840, 4to, 21s.

150. Ward’s illustrated geography in question and answer, a sequel to
“First lessons in geography by a lady.” Lond. Ward [Bungay printed 1853]
12o, 4 edit. 1859.

151. The young lady’s friend, by a lady. Glasgow, W. R. McPhun 1857,
16o, pp. 128.

    A book of advice and etiquette. The English catalogue 1835-1862 p.
      855 gives a work with this title published by Parker & son 1852.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            ADVERTISEMENTS.


                          WORKS BY THE AUTHOR.

                                -------


A martyr to bibliography: a notice of the life and works of Joseph-Marie
Quérard, bibliographer. 1867. Only 200 copies printed: price 3s 6d.

                                -------

Handbook of fictitious names, being a guide to authors chiefly in the
lighter literature of the XIXth century, who have written under assumed
names, and to literary forgers, impostors, plagiarists, and imitators,
1868.

    This work is out of print.

    “A useful and amusing guide, especially to English authors of the
      lighter literature of this century.”—Encyclopædia Britannica,
      ninth edition. 1875, vol III. p. 658.

    “A slight and tentative, though useful production, is the only work
      yet published on the anonymous and pseudonymous literature of
      Britain.”—Chambers’ Cyclopædia, London, 1874, vol. II. p. 84.

    I could quote numerous other notices. Articles have also been
      written since this work was published on the subject, mostly
      acknowledging the source of their information.

    I have now determined to limit my collections on this subject, with
      the end of the year 1879. I have been so many years engaged in
      obtaining materials that I think there will be more chance of
      publishing if I confine myself to revising and correcting what I
      have already collected. I make this declaration so that any body
      else who may be inclined may take up the subject where I leave
      off, as the presumption that I am collecting might deter others
      from doing so.

    This period, 1800-1879 is alone sufficient to occupy a lifetime.

                                -------

A bibliographical list of lord Brougham’s publications arranged in
chronological order. 1873. Only 100 copies separately printed. Price 1s.

                                -------

A few words on Swimming, with practical hints, by R. Harrington; to
which is added a bibliographical list of works on swimming by Olphar
Hamst. Price one shilling.

    I had a few thick paper copies of the list struck off separately
      with the following title:—

    Swimming: a bibliographical list of works on swimming, by the author
      of the handbook of fictitious names, 1868.

    I put the word “Swimming” at the head and used a phrase for
      pseudonym, so that it might be catalogued under the subject at the
      British Museum instead of being buried under my name.

                                -------

Catalogue of the Etchings and Drypoints of J. A. M. Whistler. 1874, with
an etching by Percy Thomas of Whistler, after a portrait by himself.
Only fifty copies printed. One guinea each.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 INDEX.


                          (Pub. = Publisher.)

                                -------


 Accuracy in bibliography, 10, 11, 12.

 Abbreviation discussed, 12;
   should be indicated, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

 Additions in cataloguing titles should be indicated, 20.

 Advertisements in books should be preserved, 17.

 Advocates Library catalogue of, 28.

 Aggravating ladies, why this title taken, 6;
   anonymous work, 15;
   list of works by, 40.

 Aikin, Dr., 9.

 Ailzie Grierson, 40.

 Alemtéjo, 49.

 Alexandria, 49.

 Allibone, Dictionary of English Literature, 30;
   index to New Testament, 31.

 Allman, pub., 46.

 Almeda, 40

 Alphabet of animals, 40.

 America, Public Libraries in, 11;
   Picture of, 49.

 Anacalypsis, 30.

 Anderson, pub., 50.

 Andrews, pub., 42.

 Anecdotes of Animals, 41.

 Anonymous works, 14;
   cataloguing, 17;
   Dictionary of, 15, 16, 19;
   means of identifying authors of, 35;
   not read with confidence, 16;
   proportion of, in libraries, 40;
   statement that work is anon, not to be relied on, 18.

 Arithmetical books, list of, 11, 19, 33, 41.

 Arithmetical class-book, 41.

 Astrologer, the, 41.

 Astronomy, 50.

 Atkinson’s medical bibliography, 40.

 Audiffredi, G. B., 15.

 Auteurs Déguisez, 15.

 Autonymous books, 14, 17.

 Apocalyptic vision, 48.

 Axon, W. E. A., 16.

 Ayscough, 30, 31.

 Bachelor, rich old, 49.

 Baillet, A., 15.

 Ball, pub., 48.

 Banks, W., 44.

 Barbier, A. A., 15.

 Barbier, Olivier, 16, 19.

 Beauty, 41.

 Bennett, Mary, 40.

 Benson & Barling, pub., 42.

 Bent, publisher, 36.

 Bessie Gray, 35.

 Bibliographers, have been careless in their descriptions, 18.

 Bibliography, too many meanings to the word, 10, 12.

 Bibliotheca Cornubiensis, 9.

 Bibliotheca geographica, 29.

 Biographia Dramatica, 40.

 Black Forest, legend of the, 41.

 Boase & Courtney’s Bibliotheca Cornubiensis, 9.

 Bogue, pub., 45.

 Book of Costumes, 41.

 Book, how to describe a, 5, 9, 37;
   different descriptions of, 14;
   Handy-book about books, 15, 16.

 Book paging should be simple, 25.

 Bookbinders tear away advertisements, 17.

 Botany, study of, 46.

 Boy’s own book, 41.

 British Almanac, 23.

 British Catalogue, the, 36, 37.

 British Critic, 50.

 British geography, 42.

 British Librarian, the, 44.

 British Museum catalogue, 11, 35, 41, 53;
   report on, 15;
   rules, 16;
   Library, 35, 40.

 Brougham, Lord, publications, 17, 19, 27, 52.

 Brown, George, an imaginary author cited as an example, 12.

 Brown, rev. J., 46.

 Buds & blossoms, 41.

 Bunting, Rev. Jabez, 49.

 Cadell, pub., 43.

 Capital letters in titles, 29.

 Caroline and her mother, 41.

 Catalogues, 10, 14;
   not to be relied on, 18;
   should not alter titles, 21;
   Art of making, 21.

 Catechism, a, 41, 45.

 Cato, a tale, 41.

 Cawthorn, pub., 49.

 Chambers Cyclopædia on the Handbook of Fictitious names, 52.

 Chapple, pub., 43.

 Charades, 45.

 Charlotte, princess, 47, 48, 51.

 Child’s Guide, 42.

 Child’s Manual, 42.

 Child’s Own Book, 42.

 Child’s Pathway, 42.

 Child’s Treasure, 42.

 Cholera orphan home, 46.

 Chollerton, 42.

 Christian’s preacher, 42.

 Christian’s Sunday alphabet, 47.

 Christmas in Ireland, 42.

 Christopher, pub., 51.

 Clarke, pub., 43, 45.

 Clarke, M. Cowden, 31.

 Cleaver, pub., 47.

 Colburn, pub., 41, 50.

 Combe, W., 49.

 Commandments, the ten, 44.

 Communicants, address to, 43.

 Companion to the almanac, 19.

 Confirmation, on, 47.

 Cook, Mrs., 46.

 Cookery, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48.

 Corney, Bolton, 12, 16, 18, 33.

 Cottage Home, 42.

 Cottager’s Assistant, 43.

 Cousin Rachel’s visit, 43.

 Cousins, The, 43.

 Craigh-Melrose Priory, 43.

 Cremorne, viscountess, 43.

 Crestadoro, A., 19-21, 37.

 Crimean Cooking, 44.

 Croker, J. W., 48.

 Crosby, pub., 48.

 Crew & Spencer, pub., 43.

 Crucifixion, The, 43.

 Cutter, C. A., 11, 24.

 Cuttle, Captain, advice quoted, 8.

 Dartmoor Legends, 43.

 Darton & Harvey, publishers, 35, 36, 41, 43, 44-45-46, 48, 49, 50.

 David, history of, 46.

 Dean, pub., 45.

 Delepierre, O., 15.

 De Morgan, Professor, his Arithmetical books, referred to, 1, 11, 19,
    24, 41;
   article in the Companion to the Almanac, 23;
   on sizes of books, 24;
   on errors, 33.

 Dictionaries, compilers of copy one another, 33.

 Dictionary catalogue, 11;
   of anonymous authors, 15, 16.

 Dolman, pub., 41, 42.

 Domestic economy, 43, 46.

 Dots of omission, 22.

 Duniol, pub., 41.

 East Indians, 36.

 Easy rhymes, 41.

 Ebers, pub., 49.

 Ecclesiasticus, 48.

 Edgeworth, Miss, fictitious reference to her, 37, 38.

 Edmonds G., 25.

 Edward Beaumont, 44.

 Edwards (Edward), 10, 14, 40.

 Effie’s tales, 44.

 Elwy, vale of, 44.

 Emily Trevor, 44.

 Encyclopædia Britannica on anonymous works, 40;
   on the Handbook of Fictitious Names, 52.

 England, Church of, 44.

 England, history of, 41, 42, 43, 44.

 English Catalogue, the, 19, 36, 37, 42, 51.

 English cookery, 43.

 English grammar, Lennie’s, 21.

 Enigmas, 45.

 Errors, difficult to avoid, 32.

 Erskine, T., 45.

 Esthwaite water, 44.

 Etchings, 53.

 Fairy Tales, 48, 51.

 Familiar Dialogues, 45.

 Fictitious names of authors, Handbook of, 5, 14, 16, 19, 36, 52.

 Fisher, pub., 45.

 Flamank, J., 36.

 Flora & Thalia, 45.

 Ford, pub., 42.

 France Littéraire (La), 9.

 Frederick William, Prince, 40.

 French Biography, 51.

 French Cookery, 43.

 French, enigmas in, 45.

 Friend’s books, 19.

 Galignani, pub., 41.

 Garden, Pleasures of a, 46.

 Garden of Language, 45.

 Gaultier’s Geography, 42.

 Genesis, 48.

 Gentleman’s Magazine, 30.

 Geography, Ancient, 50.

 Geography, British, 42.

 Geography, First lessons in, 42, 51.

 Geography, Modern, 42.

 George III. jubilee, 40.

 German Biography, 51.

 Gilly, W. S., 42.

 Girl’s Text Book, 45.

 Gleanings from many fields, 36.

 Goss, P. S., 48.

 Greenhouse, guide to, 44.

 Grammar of bibliography, there is none, 11.

 Grammar of English, 21,
   Universal, 25.

 Groombridge, pub., 41, 43.

 Hailes, pub., 42.

 Halkett, S., 16.

 Hall, pub., 51.

 Hamilton, duchess of, 47.

 Hamst, Olphar, 15, 52.

 Handbook of fictitious names, 5;
   criticisms on, author determined to stop collecting with the year
      1879, 52.

 Handel, 50.

 Happiness, Guide to, 41.

 Hardwicke, pub., 47.

 Harp of Salem, poems, 45.

 Harris, pub., 41, 48.

 Harvey see Darton.

 Hatchard, pub., 41, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.

 Hazlitt, W. C., 34.

 Hegel, G. W. F., 19.

 Higgins, G., 30, 31.

 History, Modern, 47.

 History, Universal, 42.

 Hodgson, publisher, 36.

 Holdsworth, A. H., 43.

 Hope & Co., pub., 41, 46.

 Houlston, pub., 40-43.

 Housekeeper’s assistant, 46.

 How to dress on £15 a year, 7, 41, 46.

 Hurdis, Dr., 50.

 Hymns, 35, 46, 49.

 Ida, 42.

 Index, necessity for an, 30;
   one better than two, 31;
   bad, 31;
   Society, 31.

 Ines and other poems, 46.

 Infant’s friend, 41.

 Ireland, 51;
   distress in, 42;
   Travellers in, 48.

 Italian Biography, 51.

 Italy, works of art, 49.

 Jal, A., 32, 33.

 Jarrold, pub., 42.

 Jesus the Messiah, 46, 48.

 Jewett, C. C., 10, 24.

 Johnstone, pub., 40.

 Kaisersworth Deaconesses, 47.

 Kent, duchess of, 45.

 Laconics, manual of, 9.

 Lancashire dialect, Literature of, 16.

 Law, pub., 42.

 Law List, 28.

 Lennie, W., 21.

 Leopold, prince, 47.

 Leslies, the, 46.

 Letters to my unknown friends, 47.

 Life assurance, guide to, 47.

 Linton, Mount, family, 43.

 Lisbon, 49.

 Literary men, careless in their references, 18.

 Little Lilly, a moral tale, a supposititious publication, 38.

 Little Lilly’s Travels, a real book, 38.

 London Catalogue, the, 36, 42, 46.

 Longman, pub., 36, 47, 49, 50, 51.

 Lord’s Prayer, on the, 42.

 Louis XVIII., court of, 49.

 Low, publisher, 36, 37.

 Lowndes, W. T., 13, 44.

 Lusk, pub., 45.

 Lynmouth Visitors, 47.

 Lyntot, pub., 43.

 Maconochie, (Mrs.), 44.

 Manchester free library catalogue, 19.

 Mandeville, 47.

 Martin’s Catalogue of privately printed books, 23.

 Mary, queen, 47.

 Mary, Virgin, 47.

 Masters, pub., 41, 47.

 Matlock, Journey to, 44.

 Mauritius, 49.

 McCulloch, J. R., 16, 33.

 McGlashan, pub., 44.

 McPhun, pub., 51.

 Mansoul, siege of, 50.

 Memoirs of Libraries, 10, 14.

 Messiah, The, 50.

 Metrical Remembrances, 47.

 Miller, John, his Fly Leaves, 5.

 Mirror of the graces, 6.

 Mitchell, pub., 51.

 Moral Maxims, 48.

 Motto, on title page, 19.

 Mozley, pub., 48.

 Mozley, Mrs., works by, 35.

 Murray, pub., 43, 44, 48, 49.

 Music for schools, 44.

 My Norske note Book, 48.

 Natural history, 45, 48.

 Naylor, C., 24.

 Needlework, 47.

 Nelson, publisher, 38, 47.

 New-church doctrine, 42.

 New Estate, The, 36, 48.

 Nicholas, Bishop of Melipotamus, 42.

 Nichols, John, 31.

 Nichols, T., 11.

 Nightingale, F., 45.

 Nisbet, pub., 46.

 Norfolk, 49.

 Norton, hon. C. E. S., 49.

 Norway, month in, 48.

 Notes and Queries, 5, 10, 16, 17, 24, 36, 41.

 Old Bridge, the, 35.

 Orb of Light, 48.

 Oriental Cookery, 43.

 Oriental Nature, a glimpse of, 45.

 Original Fables, 48.

 Orr, pub., 44.

 Outlines of Truth, 48.

 Oxford, bishop of, 43.

 Panizzi, Sir A., 11.

 Parke, Justice, 44.

 Parker, pub., 45, 49, 51.

 Partridge, pub., 47.

 Pentateuch, questions from the, 43.

 Phantasie’s birthday, 46.

 Philanthropist, the, 48.

 Pickering, pub., 48.

 Pocock, pub., 44.

 Political economy, literature of, 16, 33.

 Polyonymous books, 14.

 Portugal, a tale, 35, 48, 49.

 Portuguese Biography, 51.

 Power, John, 15, 16.

 Prefaces not dated, 23.

 Printing, style of, 27.

 Privately printed books, 23.

 Protestant Church, 44.

 Pseudonymous books, 14, 17;
   means of identifying authors of, 35;
   list of, 40, 52.

 Public libraries in the United States, report on, 11.

 Publication, place of, 22;
   date of, 23.

 Publisher’s names not often found in book lists, 22;
   when important, 23.

 Punctuation of titles, 29.

 Quérard, J. M., 9, 15, 17, 52.

 Ravensdale, 49.

 Redeemed Rose, the, 49.

 Revelation, 48.

 Rivingtons, pub., 43, 45, 51.

 Robert Marshall, 35.

 Roberts, pub., 43, 47.

 Roberts, Emma, 48.

 Robinson, pub., 44.

 Rodwell & Martin, pub., 43.

 Roman Church, 44.

 Routledge, pub., 46.

 Rozelli, Life of, 40.

 Rules for cataloguing, 10, 11.

 Ryde, 37, 38.

 Sacraments, the Two, 44.

 Saunders & Otley, pub., 41, 50, 51.

 Sceptic, The, 50.

 Scotch Cookery, 43.

 Seaman, Miss, a fictitious name used for the purpose of illustration,
    37;
   supposed works of, 38.

 Seeley, pub., 46, 49.

 Selina, a novel, 50.

 Sermons for children, 43.

 Shaw, pub., 41, 45, 50.

 Sierra Leone, 49.

 Simpkin, pub., 42, 43, 44, 45, 51.

 Shakespeare, indexes to, 30;
   words from, 50.

 Smith, pub., 45, 46, 47.

 Smith, J., fictitious publisher’s name, 38.

 Smith, John, Printer’s manual, 32.

 Smith, John Russell, pub., 50.

 Smith, Joseph, 19.

 Smithsonian Report, 24.

 Spain yesterday and to-day, 35, 50.

 Spanish Biography, 51.

 Spelling simplified, 42.

 Spratt, M., 45.

 Stanley Ghost, 35.

 Stereotyped books, 23.

 Stevens, H., on catalogues, 29.

 Stewart, Agnes M., 41.

 Stockdale, pub., 47, 51.

 Sulger, H., 50.

 Supercheries Littéraires, 15.

 Swimming, list of works on, 19, 53.

 Symonds, pub., 40.

 Syntax, Dr., 49.

 Tabart, pub., 44.

 Tales of the Classics, 42, 50.

 Titles from the German, 50.

 Titles from the Spanish, 51.

 Taylor, pub., 45.

 Taylor, J., Manual of Laconics, 9.

 Temple, countess, 51.

 Testament, Old and New, 42, 46.

 Thomas, Percy, portrait of Whistler by, 52.

 Timperley’s Printer’s manual, 25, 32.

 Title page, 12, 13, 18.

 Truewit, T., pseud., 14.

 Twelve years ago, 51.

 Twice married, 51.

 Urban, Sylvanus, pseudonym of the editors of the Gentleman’s Magazine,
    18.

 Vater Unser, a tale, 51.

 Ventilation, an essay on, supposititious title given as an
    illustration, 12.

 Vernon, Mrs., 44.

 Versailles, 43.

 Victoria, princess, 45, 50.

 Village incidents, 51.

 Virginia, 49.

 Wales, Travellers in, 48.

 Wallis, pub., 51.

 Ward, pub., 44, 49, 51.

 Warne, pub., 41, 44, 46.

 Washbourne, pub., 45.

 Wertheim, pub., 46, 48.

 Whately, Arch., 36.

 Wheatley, H. B., on indexes, 31.

 Whistler, catalogue of his etchings, 52.

 Whittaker, pub., 42, 44, 47, 50, 51.

 Woman, 51.

 Workwoman’s guide, 51.

 Winchester, Bishop of, 46.

 Youth’s magazine, 46.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Transcriber’s Notes


This file uses _underscores_ to indicate italic text.

There were significant errors and inconsistencies in the printed index;
to address these, ditto marks and some dashes have been expanded, and
punctuation in the index, including for entries and sub-entries, has
been silently corrected and standardized. Some entries that were
originally out of alphabetical order have been reordered.

In the list of works, all punctuation has been retained as printed,
except for a few apparent printer’s errors.

Itemized changes from the original text:

 • Table of Contents: Corrected page number for section “Of different
   descriptions...” from 15 to 14 to match actual pagination
 • p. 16, n. 12: Missing comma supplied after “Bolton Corney”
 • p. 17: Corrected “bcause” to “because”
 • p. 25, n. 26: Opening quotation mark omitted before “A universal
   alphabet...”
 • p. 32: Corrected “lankey” to “lanky”
 • p. 38: Supplied period after “1” to match other list entries
 • p. 41: Supplied period after “by a lady” in entry 44
 • p. 41: Replaced center dot with period after “by a lady” in entry 17
 • p. 47: Supplied period apparently omitted by printer after “Lond” in
   entry 92.
 • p. 51: Supplied period apparently omitted by printer after “Countess
   Temple” in entry 138.
 • p. 52: Corrected “Twelve years a go, atale” to “Twelve years ago, a
   tale” in entry 141
 • p. 52: Corrected “Encyclopœdia Brittanica” to “Encyclopædia
   Brittanica”
 • p. 53: Added dividing line before “A few words on Swimming” for
   consistency
 • p. 58: Corrected “Arithmetical class book” to “Arithmetical
   class-book” in index to match reference in text
 • p. 54: Corrected “different discriptions of” to “different
   descriptions of”
 • p. 55: Corrected “Fictious names of authors” to “Fictitious names of
   authors”
 • p. 57: Corrected “Spain yesterday and to day” to “Spain yesterday and
   to-day”
 • p. 58: Corrected “Truewitt, T.” to “Truewit, T.” in index to match
   reference in text

Ditto marks in the index have been replaced with text.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the public
domain.
